PDF PAGE 1
Data Snooping, Technical Trading,
Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
By
Ryan Sullivan, Allan Timmermann
and Halbert White
DISCUSSION PAPER 303
October 1998
_______________________________________________
FINANCIAL MARKETS GROUP
AN ESRC RESEARCH CENTRE
_______________________________________________
LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Financial Markets Group.
ISSN 0956-8549-303

PDF PAGE 2
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading
Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
RYAN SULLIVAN
619-274-7708 (phone)
619-274-7709 (fax)
rmsullivan@ucsd.edu
University of California, San Diego
Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, California 92093-0508
ALLAN TIMMERMANN
+44 171 955 6394 (phone)
+44 171 955 7420 (fax)
a.timmermann@lse.ac.uk
London School of Economics
Department of Accounting and Finance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
HALBERT WHITE
619-534-3502 (phone)
619-534-7040 (fax)
hwhite@albert.ucsd.edu
University of California, San Diego
Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, California 92093-0508
October 1998
Journal of Finance, Forthcoming

PDF PAGE 3


PDF PAGE 4
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance,
and the Bootstrap
RYAN SULLIVAN, ALLAN TIMMERMANN, AND HALBERT WHITE*
ABSTRACT
In this paper we utilize White’s Reality Check bootstrap methodology
(White (1997)) to evaluate simple technical trading rules while
quantifying the data-snooping bias and fully adjusting for its effect in the
context of the full universe from which the trading rules were drawn.
Hence, for the first time, the paper presents a comprehensive test of
performance across all technical trading rules examined. We consider the
study of Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), expand their universe of
26 trading rules, apply the rules to 100 years of daily data on the Dow
Jones Industrial Average, and determine the effects of data-snooping.

PDF PAGE 5
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Technical trading rules have been used in financial markets for over a century.
Numerous studies have been performed to determine whether such rules can be employed
to provide superior investing performance.1 By and large, recent academic literature
suggests that technical trading rules are capable of producing valuable economic signals.
In perhaps the most comprehensive recent study of technical trading rules using 90 years
of daily stock prices, Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992) (BLL, hereafter) find that
26 technical trading rules applied to the Dow Jones Industrial Average significantly
outperform a benchmark of holding cash. Their findings are especially strong since every
single one of the trading rules they consider is capable of beating the benchmark. When
taken at face value, these results indicate either that the stock market is not efficient even
in the weak form – a conclusion which, if found to be robust, will go against most
researchers’ prior beliefs – or that risk premia display considerable variation even over
very short periods of time (i.e., at the daily interval).
An important issue generally encountered, but rarely directly addressed when evaluating
technical trading rules, is data-snooping. Data-snooping occurs when a given set of data
is used more than once for purposes of inference or model selection. When such data
reuse occurs, there is always the possibility that any satisfactory results obtained may
simply be due to chance rather than to any merit inherent in the method yielding the
results. With respect to their choice of technical trading rules, BLL state that “…
numerous moving average rules can be designed, and some, without a doubt, will work.
However, the dangers of data snooping are immense.”2 Thus, BLL rightfully
acknowledge the effects of data-snooping. They go on to evaluate their results by fitting
several models to the raw data and resampling the residuals to create numerous bootstrap
samples. The goal of this effort is to determine the statistical significance of their
findings. However, as acknowledged by BLL, they are not able “to compute a
comprehensive test across all rules. Such a test would have to take into account the
dependencies between results for different rules.”3 This task has thus far eluded
researchers.
- 1 -

PDF PAGE 6
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
A main purpose of our paper is to extend and enrich the earlier research on technical
trading rules by applying a novel procedure that permits computation of precisely such a
test. Although the bootstrap approach (introduced by Efron (1979)) is not new to the
evaluation of technical analysis, White’s Reality Check bootstrap methodology
(introduced by White (1997)) adopted in this paper permits us to correct for the effects of
data-snooping in a manner not previously possible. Thus we are able to evaluate the
performance of technical trading rules in a way that permits us to ascertain whether
superior performance is a result of superior economic content, or simply due to luck.4
The potential impact of data-snooping on the performance of technical trading rules is
recognized early on by Jensen and Bennington (1970) who refer to it as ‘selection bias’
and explain it this way: “… given enough computer time, we are sure that we can find a
mechanical trading rule which “works” on a table of random numbers – provided of
course that we are allowed to test the rule on the same table of numbers which we used to
discover the rule.” (p. 470)
Data-snooping need not be the consequence of a particular researcher’s efforts.5 It can
result from a subtle survivorship bias operating on the entire universe of technical trading
rules that have been considered historically. Suppose that, over time, investors have
experimented with technical trading rules drawn from a very wide universe – in principle
thousands of parameterizations of a variety of types of rules. As time progresses, the
rules that happen to perform well historically receive more attention and are considered
‘serious contenders’ by the investment community, while unsuccessful trading rules are
more likely to be forgotten.6 After a long sample period, only a small set of trading rules
may be left for consideration, and these rules’ historical track record will be cited as
evidence of their merits. If enough trading rules are considered over time, some rules are
bound by pure luck, even in a very large sample, to produce superior performance even if
they do not genuinely possess predictive power over asset returns. Of course, inference
based solely on the subset of surviving trading rules may be misleading in this context
since it does not account for the full set of initial trading rules, most of which are likely to
have underperformed.
- 2 -

PDF PAGE 7
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
The effects of such data-snooping, operating over time and across many investors and
researchers, can only be quantified provided that one considers the performance of the
best trading rule in the context of the full universe of trading rules from which this rule
conceivably is chosen. A further purpose of our study is to address this issue by
constructing a universe of nearly 8,000 parameterizations of trading rules which are
applied to the Dow Jones Industrial Average over a 100-year period from 1897 to 1996.
We use the same data set as BLL to investigate the potential effects of data-snooping in
their experiment.7 Our results show that, during the sample period originally investigated
by BLL, 1897–1986, certain trading rules did indeed outperform the benchmark, even
after adjustment is made for data-snooping. We base our evaluation both on mean
returns and on the Sharpe ratio which adjusts for total risk.
Since BLL’s study finished in 1986, we benefit from having access to another 10 years of
data on the Dow Jones portfolio. We use this data to test whether their results hold out-
of-sample. Interestingly, we find that this is not the case: the probability that the best-
performing trading rule did not outperform the benchmark during this period is nearly 12
percent, suggesting that, at conventional levels of significance, there is scant evidence
that technical trading rules were of any economic value during the period 1987–1996.
To determine whether transaction costs or short-sale constraints could have accounted for
the apparent historical success of the trading rules studied by BLL, we also conduct our
bootstrap simulation experiment using price data on the Standard and Poor’s 500 (S&P
500) index futures. Transaction costs are easy to control in trading the futures contract
and it also would not have been a problem to take a short position in this contract. Over
the 13-year period since the futures contract started trading in 1984, we find no evidence
that the trading rules outperform the benchmark.
While the current paper adopts a bootstrap methodology to evaluate the performance of
technical trading rules, the methodology applied in this paper also has a wide range of
other applications. This is important, because the dangers from data-snooping emerge in
- 3 -

PDF PAGE 8
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
many areas of finance and economics, such as in the predictability of stock returns (as
addressed by, for example, Foster, Smith, and Whaley (1997)), modeling of exchange
and interest rates, identification of factors and “anomalies” in cross-sectional tests of
asset pricing models (Lo and MacKinlay (1990)), and other exercises where theory does
not suggest the exact identity and functional form of the model to be tested. Thus, the
chosen model is likely to be data-dependent and a genuinely meaningful out-of-sample
experiment is difficult to carry out.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section I introduces the bootstrap data-snooping
methodology, Section II reviews the existing evidence on technical trading rules, and
Section III introduces the universe of trading rules that we consider in the empirical
analysis. Section IV presents our bootstrap results for the data set studied by BLL, while
Section V conducts the out-of-sample experiment. Finally, Section VI discusses in more
detail the economic interpretation of our findings.
I. The Bootstrap Snooper
Data-snooping biases are widely recognized to be a very significant problem in financial
studies. They have been quantified by Lo and MacKinlay (1990)8, described in
mainstream books on investing (O’Shaughnessy (1997), page 24) and forecasting
(Diebold (1998), page 87), and have recently been addressed in the popular press
(Business Week, Coy (1997)): “For example, [David Leinweber, managing director of
First Quadrant, LP, in Pasadena, California] sifted through a United Nations CD-ROM
and discovered that historically, the single best prediction of the Standard & Poor’s 500
stock index was butter production in Bangladesh.” Our purpose in this study is to
determine whether technical trading rules have genuine predictive ability or fall into the
category of “butter production in Bangladesh”. The apparatus used to accomplish this is
the Reality Check bootstrap methodology which we briefly describe.
Building on work of Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996), White (1997)
provides a procedure to test whether a given model has predictive superiority over a
benchmark model after accounting for the effects of data-snooping. The idea is to
- 4 -

PDF PAGE 9
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
evaluate the distribution of a suitable performance measure giving consideration to the
full set of models that led to the best-performing trading rule. The test procedure is based
on the l ´ 1 performance statistic:
T
f =n - 1å f $ , (1)
t+1
t=R
where l is the number of technical trading rules, n is the number of prediction periods
indexed from R through T so that T = R + n – 1, f
$
= f (Z,
b$
) is the observed
t+1 t t
performance measure for period t+1, and
b$
is a vector of estimated parameters.
t
Generally, Z consists of a vector of dependent variables and predictor variables consistent
with Diebold and Mariano’s (1995) or West’s (1996) assumptions. For convenience, we
reproduce key results of White (1997) in Appendix B.
In our application there are no estimated parameters. Instead, the various
parameterizations of the trading rules (b , k = 1,…,l) directly generate returns that are
k
then used to measure performance. In our full sample of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average, n is set equal to 27,069, representing nearly 100 years of daily predictions. R is
set equal to 251, accommodating the technical trading rules which require 250 days of
previous data in order to provide a trading signal. For the purpose of assessing technical
trading rules, each of which is indexed by a subscript k, we follow the literature in
choosing the following form for f :
k,t+1
f = ln[1 + y S ( c , b )] – ln[1 + y S ( c , b )], k = 1, …, l (2)
k,t+1 t+1 k t k t+1 0 t 0
where
c { } R
= X , (3)
t t- i i=0
X is the original price series (the Dow Jones Industrials Average and S&P 500 futures, in
t
our case), y = (X – X) / X, and S ( × ) and S ( × ) are “signal” functions that convert
t+1 t+1 t t k 0
c
the sequence of price index information into market positions, for system parameters
t
b and b .9 The signal functions have a range of three values: 1 represents a long
k 0
position, 0 represents a neutral position (i.e., out of the market), and –1 represents a short
- 5 -

PDF PAGE 10
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
position. As discussed below, we will utilize an extension of this setup to evaluate the
trading rules with the Sharpe ratio (relative to a risk-free rate) in addition to mean returns.
The natural null hypothesis to test when assessing whether there exists a superior
technical trading rule is that the performance of the best technical trading rule is no better
than the performance of the benchmark. In other words,
H : max {E( f )} £ 0. (4)
0 k
k=1,...,l
Rejection of this null hypothesis will lead us to believe that the best technical trading rule
achieves performance superior to the benchmark.
White (1997) shows that this null hypothesis can be evaluated by applying the stationary
bootstrap of Politis and Romano (1994) to the observed values of f . Appendix C
k,t
explains the details of our application of the bootstrap as well as our choice of parameters
in the block resampling procedure. Resampling the returns from the trading rules yields
B bootstrapped values of
- 6 -

PDF PAGE 11
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
h 1 = y S ( c , b ), (8)
k,t+1 t+1 k t k
h 2 = ( y S ( c , b ) )2, (9)
k,t+1 t+1 k t k
3 f
h = r , (10)
k,t+1 t+1
wherer f is the risk-free interest rate at time t+1 and the form of g(×) is given by
t+1
( ) ( )
g(E(h )) =
k,t+1 ( ) ( )
- 7 -

PDF PAGE 12
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
place some weight on technical analysis when predicting future returns. Unsurprisingly,
the wide use of technical analysis in the finance industry has resulted in several academic
studies to determine its value.
Levich and Thomas (1993) research simple moving average and filter trading rules in the
foreign currency futures market. They apply a bootstrap approach to the raw returns on
the futures, rather than fitting a model to the data and resampling the residuals. Their
research suggests that some technical rules may be profitable. Evidence in favor of
technical analysis is also reported in Osler and Chang (1995) who use bootstrap
procedures to examine the head and shoulders charting pattern in foreign exchange
markets. However, Levich and Thomas (1993) note the dangers of data-snooping and
suggest that “Other filter sizes and moving average lengths along with other technical
models could, of course, be analyzed. Data-mining exercises of this sort must be
avoided.”10 With the development of White’s Reality Check, it is no longer necessary to
avoid such data mining exercises, as we can now account for their effects.
Our study uses Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992) as a springboard for analysis.
Their study utilizes the daily closing price of the Dow Jones Industrial Average from
1897 to 1986 to evaluate 26 technical trading rules. These rules include the simple
moving average, fixed moving average, and trading range break. BLL find that these
rules provide superior performance. One drawback to their analysis is that they are
unable to account for data-snooping biases. In their words, “… the possibility that
various spurious patterns were uncovered by technical analysis cannot be dismissed.
Although a complete remedy for data-snooping biases does not exist, we mitigate this
problem: (1) by reporting results from all our trading strategies, (2) by utilizing a very
long data series, the Dow Jones index from 1897 to 1986, and (3) emphasizing the
robustness of results across various nonoverlapping subperiods for statistical inference.”
As explained in the previous section, our method provides just such a data-snooping
remedy.
- 8 -

PDF PAGE 13
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Three conclusions can be drawn from these previous studies. First, there appears to be
evidence that technical trading rules are capable of producing superior performance.
Second, this evidence is tempered by the widely recognized importance of data-snooping
biases when evaluating the empirical results. Third, the preferred way to handle data-
snooping appears to be to focus exclusively on the performance of a small subset of
trading rules, in order not to fall victim to data-snooping biases. Nevertheless, as
mentioned in the introduction, there are reasons to believe that such a strategy may not
work in practice. Technical trading rules that historically have been successful are also
the ones most likely to catch the attention of researchers, since they are the ones
promoted by textbooks and the financial press. Hence, even though individual
researchers may act prudently and do not experiment extensively across trading rules, the
financial community may effectively have acted as such a “filter”, necessitating a
consideration in principle of all trading rules that have been considered by investors.
III. Universe of Trading Rules
To conduct our bootstrap data-snooping analysis, we first need to specify an appropriate
universe of trading rules from which the current popular rules conceivably may have
been drawn. The magnitude of data-snooping effects on the assessment of the
performance of the best trading rule is determined by the dependence between all the
trading rules’ payoffs, so the design of the universe from which the trading rules are
drawn is crucial to the experiment. We consider a very large number (7,846) of trading
rules drawn from a wide variety of rule specifications. To be considered in our universe,
a trading rule must have been in use in a substantial part of the sample period. This
requirement is important for the economic interpretation of our results. Only if the
trading rules under consideration are known during the sample would the existence of
outperforming trading rules seem to have consequences for weak-form market efficiency
or variations in ex ante risk premia.11 For this reason, we make a point of referring to
sources that quote the use of the various trading rules under consideration.
The trading rules employed in this paper are drawn from previous academic studies and
the technical analysis literature. Included are filter rules, moving averages, support and
- 9 -

PDF PAGE 14
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
resistance, channel break-outs, and on-balance volume averages. We briefly describe
each of these types of rules. Appendix A provides the parameterizations of the 7,846
trading rules used to create the complete universe. Few of the original sources for the
technical trading rules report their preferred choice of parameter values, so we simply
choose a wide range of parameterizations to span the sorts of models investors may have
considered through time. Of course, our list of trading rules does not completely exhaust
the set of rules that were considered historically. Nevertheless, our list of rules is vastly
larger than those compiled in previous studies, and we include the most important types
of trading rules that can be parsimoniously parameterized and do not rely on “subjective”
judgments.
The notation used in the following description corresponds to that used in the appendix
on trading rule parameters.
A. Filter Rules
Filter rules are used in Alexander (1961) to assess the efficiency of stock price
movements. Fama and Blume (1966) explain the standard filter rule:
An x per cent filter is defined as follows: If the daily closing price of a
particular security moves up at least x per cent, buy and hold the security
until its price moves down at least x per cent from a subsequent high, at
which time simultaneously sell and go short. The short position is
maintained until the daily closing price rises at least x per cent above a
subsequent low at which time one covers and buys. Moves less than x per
cent in either direction are ignored.
The first item of consideration is how to define subsequent lows and highs. We will do
this in two ways. As the above excerpt suggests, a subsequent high is the highest closing
price achieved while holding a particular long position. Likewise, a subsequent low is
the lowest closing price achieved while holding a particular short position. Alternatively,
a low (high) can be defined as the most recent closing price that is less (greater) than the
- 10 -

PDF PAGE 15
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
e previous closing prices. Next, we will expand the universe of filter rules by allowing a
neutral position to be imposed. This is accomplished by liquidating a long position when
the price decreases y percent from the previous high, and covering a short position when
the price increases y percent from the previous low. Following BLL (1992), we also
consider holding a given long or short position for a prespecified number of days, c,
effectively ignoring all other signals generated during that time.
B. Moving Averages
Moving average cross-over rules, highlighted in BLL, are one of the most popular and
common trading rules discussed in the technical analysis literature. The standard moving
average rule, which utilizes the price line and the moving average of price, generates
signals as explained in Gartley (1935):
In an uptrend, long commitments are retained as long as the price trend
remains above the moving average. Thus, when the price trend reaches a
top, and turns downward, the downside penetration of the moving average
is regarded as a sell signal… Similarly, in a downtrend, short positions
are held as long as the price trend remains below the moving average.
Thus, when the price trend reaches a bottom, and turns upward, the upside
penetration of the moving average is regarded as a buy signal.12
There are numerous variations and modifications of this rule. We examine several of
these. For example, more than one moving average (MA) can be used to generate trading
signals. Buy and sell signals can be generated by cross-overs of a slow moving average
by a fast moving average, where a slow MA is calculated over a greater number of days
than the fast MA.13
There are two types of “filters” we impose on the moving average rules. The filters are
said to assist in filtering out false trading signals (i.e., those signals that would result in
losses). The fixed percentage band filter requires that the buy or sell signal exceed the
moving average by a fixed multiplicative amount, b. The time delay filter requires that
- 11 -

PDF PAGE 16
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
the buy or sell signal remain valid for a prespecified number of days, d, before action is
taken. Note that only one filter will be imposed at a given time. Once again, we consider
holding a given long or short position for a prespecified number of days, c.
C. Support and Resistance
The notion of support and resistance is discussed as early as in Wyckoff (1910) and
tested in BLL (1992) under the title of “trading range break”. A simple trading rule
based on the notion of support and resistance (S&R) is to buy when the closing price
exceeds the maximum price over the previous n days, and sell when the closing price is
less than the minimum price over the previous n days. Rather than base the rules on the
maximum (minimum) over a prespecified range of days, the S&R trading rules can also
be based on an alternate definition of local extrema. That is, define a minimum
(maximum) to be the most recent closing price that is less (greater) than the e previous
closing prices. As with the moving average rules, a fixed percentage band filter, b, and a
time delay filter, d, can be included. Also, positions can be held for a prespecified
number of days, c.
D. Channel Break-Outs
A channel (sometimes referred to as a trading range) can be said to occur when the high
over the previous n days is within x percent of the low over the previous n days, not
including the current price. Channels have their origin in the “line” of Dow Theory
which was set forth by Charles Dow around the turn of the century.14 The rules we
develop for testing the channel break-out are to buy when the closing price exceeds the
channel, and to sell when the price moves below the channel. Long and short positions
are held for a fixed number of days, c. Additionally, a fixed percentage band, b, can be
applied to the channel as a filter.
E. On-Balance Volume Averages
Technical analysts often rely on volume of transactions data to assist in their market-
timing efforts. Although volume is generally used as a secondary tool, we include a
volume-based indicator trading rule in our universe of rules. The on-balance volume
- 12 -

PDF PAGE 17
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
(OBV) indicator, popularized in Granville (1963), is calculated by keeping a running total
of the indicator each day and adding the entire amount of daily volume when the closing
price increases, and subtracting the daily volume when the closing price decreases. We
then apply a moving average of n days to the OBV indicator, as suggested in Gartley
(1935). The OBV trading rules employed are the same as for the moving average trading
rules, except in this case the value of interest is the OBV indicator rather than price.
F. Benchmark
Following BLL, our benchmark trading rule for the mean return performance measure is
the “null” system, which is always out of the market. Consequently, S is always zero.
0
An alternative interpretation, also emphasized by BLL (page 1741), is to regard a long
position in the DJIA as the benchmark and superimpose the trading signals on this market
index. According to this second interpretation a buy signal translates into borrowing
money at the risk-free interest rate and doubling the investment in the stock index, a
“neutral” signal translates into simply holding the stock index, while a sell signal
translates into a zero position in the stock index (i.e., out of the market).
In the case of the Sharpe ratio criterion, we follow standard practice and compute this
measure relative to the benchmark of a risk-free rate. This also means that trading rules
earn the risk-free rate on days where a neutral signal is generated.
G. Span of the Trading Rules
An important question is whether or not our full universe of trading rules spans a space
significantly larger than that spanned by the 26 BLL rules. To investigate this issue, we
form the covariance matrix of returns for the BLL universe of trading rules, which is a 26
´ 26 matrix. Also, we randomly select 474 rules from the full universe and add these to
the 26 BLL rules for a total of 500 rules, and then form the covariance matrix of returns
for the 500 rules. This provides a 500 ´ 500 covariance matrix.15 Applying principal
components analysis to both of the matrices yields their respective sets of eigenvalues.
The greater is the number of nonzero eigenvalues, the larger is the effective span of the
- 13 -

PDF PAGE 18
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
trading rules, so we can address this question by comparing the eigenvalues of the two
matrices.
[Insert Figure 1]
Figure 1 provides the results from this exercise in the form of a ‘scree’ diagram plotting
the eigenvalues (sorted in descending order) along the horizontal axis. The ten largest
eigenvalues are plotted in Panel A of Figure 1, while the next 190 eigenvalues are plotted
in Panel B, thereby exhibiting the 200 largest eigenvalues. Of course, the covariance
matrix for the BLL universe only has 26 eigenvalues.
The figure suggests that the covariance matrix of returns for the full universe has
substantially more nonzero eigenvalues than the matrix for the BLL universe. For
example, the BLL universe eigenvalues drop below 1.0 ´ 10-5 after only 11 eigenvalues.
The random sample of the full universe, on the other hand, has 196 eigenvalues above 1.0
´ 10-5. This experiment is performed numerous times with different random samples of
the full universe of trading rules. The qualitative results do not change. Thus we can be
assured that our universe of 7,846 trading rules does indeed span a substantially larger
space than the original 26 BLL rules. It is important that the span of the set of trading
rules included in our universe is sufficiently large because the data-snooping adjustment
only accounts for snooping within the space spanned by the included rules.
IV. Empirical Results
The trading results from the Dow Jones Industrial Average are reported for the 90 years
and four subperiods used by BLL, as well as for the entire 100-year full sample and the
10 years since the BLL study.16 The S&P 500 Futures results are reported for the entire
available sample. The sample periods are:
In-Sample
Subperiod 1: January 1897 – December 1914
Subperiod 2: January 1915 – December 1938
- 14 -

PDF PAGE 19
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Subperiod 3: January 1939 – June 1962
Subperiod 4: July 1962 – December 1986
Out-of-Sample
Subperiod 5: January 1987 – December 1996
S&P 500 Futures: January 1984 – December 1996
For each sample period, Table I reports the historically best-performing trading rule,
chosen according to the mean return criterion. Two trading rule universes are used: the
BLL universe with 26 rules and our full universe with 7,846 rules. Table II reports
results when the best-performing trading rule is chosen according to the Sharpe ratio
criterion.
[Insert Table I]
[Insert Table II]
One would expect that the best-performing trading rule in the full universe would be
different from the best performer in the much smaller and more restricted BLL universe.
But it is interesting to notice the very different types of trading rules that are identified as
optimal performers in the full universe. The BLL study identifies trading rules based on
long moving averages – 50-, 150-, and 200-day averages, respectively – as the best
performers, while in the full universe of trading rules, the best-performing trading rules
use much shorter windows of data typically based on two- through five-day averages.
Hence the best trading rules from the full universe are more likely to trade on very short-
term price movements.
A. Results for the Mean Return Criterion
Table III presents the performance results of the best technical trading rule in each of the
sample periods. The table reports the performance measure (i.e., mean return) along with
White’s Reality Check p-value and the nominal p-value. The nominal p-value is that
- 15 -

PDF PAGE 20
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
which results from applying the bootstrap methodology to the best trading rule only,
thereby ignoring the effects of the data-snooping. Hence, the difference between the two
p-values will represent the magnitude of the data-snooping bias on the performance
measure.
[Insert Table III]
Turning to the actual performance of the selected trading rules, first consider the results
for the universe of 26 trading rules used by BLL. Both in the full sample and in the first
four subperiods, we find that the apparent superior performance of the best trading rule
stands up to a closer inspection for data-snooping effects. This finding is not surprising
since BLL find that, in fact, every single one of their trading rules outperforms the
benchmark, and hence a consideration of dependencies between trading rules is unlikely
to overturn their original finding.
Over the 100-year period from 1897 to 1996 the best technical trading rule from the BLL
universe is a 50-day variable moving average rule with a 0.01 band, yielding an
annualized return of 9.4 percent.17 For comparison, the mean annualized return on the
buy-and-hold strategy is 4.3 percent during this same period. In our full universe, the
best trading rule chosen by the mean return criterion is a standard five-day moving
average rule. The average annual return resulting from this rule is 17.2 percent. The
Reality Check p-value is effectively zero (i.e., less than 1/B = 0.002) strongly indicating
that trading with the five-day moving average is superior to being out of the market. In
all four subperiods we find again that the best trading rule outperforms the benchmark
strategy generating data-snooping adjusted p-values less than 0.002. Furthermore, the
mean return of the best trading rule in the full universe tends to be much higher than the
mean return of the best trading rule considered by BLL.
Considering next the full universe of trading rules from which, over time, the BLL rules
are more likely to have originated, notice that two possible outcomes can occur when an
additional trading rule is inspected. If the marginal trading rule does not lead to an
- 16 -

PDF PAGE 21
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
improvement over the previously best performing trading rule, then the p-value for the
null hypothesis that the best model does not outperform will increase, effectively
accounting for the fact that the best trading rule has been selected from a larger set of
rules. On the other hand, if the additional trading rule improves on the maximum
performance statistic, then this can reduce the p-value since better performance increases
the probability that the optimal model genuinely contains valuable economic
information.18
[Insert Figure 2]
Figure 2 provides a fascinating picture of these effects operating sequentially across the
full universe of trading rules. For the first subperiod, 1897–1914, the figure plots the
number identifying each trading rule against its mean return.19 We have also drawn a line
tracking the highest annualized mean return (measured on the y-axis to the left of the
figure) up to and including a given number of trading rules (indicated on the x-axis), and
the Reality Check p-value for the maximum mean return performance statistic (measured
on the y-axis to the right of the figure). The maximum mean return performance starts
out around 11 percent and quickly increases to 15 percent, yielding a p-value of 0.002
after the first 200 trading rules have been considered. Adding another 300 trading rules
does not improve on the best-performing trading rule while the likelihood of no superior
performance, as measured by the p-value, remains unchanged between rules 200 and 500.
After approximately 550 trading rules have been considered, the best performance is
improved to around 17 percent and the p-value is kept to a level less than 0.002. After
this, only a very small additional improvement in the performance statistic occurs around
trading rule number 2,700. Note that this evolution illustrates how the p-values adjust as
our particular exercise proceeds. Ultimately, the only numbers that matter are those at
the extreme right of the graph, as the order of experiments is arbitrary. Still, this
evolution is informative as it suggests how the effects of data-snooping may propagate in
the real world.
- 17 -

PDF PAGE 22
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
[Insert Figure 3]
An even sharper picture of the operation of data-snooping effects emerges from the
corresponding graph (Figure 3) for the second subperiod, 1915–1938. For this period, the
best performing model is selected early on and remains in effect across the first 500
models. As a result, its p-value increases from 0.01 to 0.097 as more models are
considered. After this, the addition of a model which improves the mean performance to
20 percent causes the p-value to drop to less than 0.002. Only at about rule 4,250 does
the p-value increase marginally as no more improvements occur and the effective span of
trading rules is increased.
A further issue at stake is how a trader could have possibly determined the best technical
trading rule prior to committing money to a given rule. Although it may be the case that
we are able to find the historically best-performing rule in our universe, there is no
indication that it is possible to find ex ante the trading rule that will perform best in the
future. To address this issue we consider a new trading strategy whereby on each day of
the experiment we first determine the best-performing trading rule to date. That is, we
find the rule with the greatest cumulative wealth for each day in the 100-year sample, and
then follow the signal of that rule on the following day. At each point in time only
historically available information is exploited so this trading rule could have been
implemented by an investor.
[Insert Table IV]
The results of this experiment are provided in Table IV, along with summary statistics for
the best-performing technical trading rule chosen with respect to the mean return
criterion, the five-day simple moving average. Table IV shows that the recursive
cumulative wealth trading rule described above outperforms the benchmark with a 14.9
percent annualized average return, but lags behind the five-day moving average by over
two percentage points, reflecting the fact that investors could not have known ex ante the
identity of the ex post best-performing trading rule. It is interesting to see that the
- 18 -

PDF PAGE 23
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
number of short and long trades is roughly balanced out and that the winning percentage
is much higher for the long than for the short trades. Long trades are also associated with
average profits that are more than twice as large as those on the short trades.
B. Results for the Sharpe Ratio Criterion
Proper construction of the Sharpe ratio requires excess returns to be measured, where
excess returns are the returns from the technical trading rule less the risk-free interest
rate. The available data on daily risk-free interest rates is limited so we employ data from
three separate sources for three overlapping periods. From 1897 to 1925, we use the
interest rate for 90-day stock exchange time loans as reported in Banking and Monetary
Statistics, 1914–1941 (1943). These rates are reported on a monthly basis and we convert
them into a daily series by simply applying the interest rate reported for a given month to
each day of that month. From 1926 to June 1954, we use the one-month T-bill rates from
the Fama/Bliss risk-free rates CRSP file, also reported on a monthly basis, and convert
into a daily series in the same way. Finally, from July 1954 to 1996, we use the daily
Federal funds rate.20 These three sets of interest rates are concatenated to form one
series, where the annualized rates reported are converted into daily rates using the
following formula:
ln(1+r )
r = ann , (16)
d
252
where r is the daily interest rate, r is the reported annualized rate, and 252 represents
d ann
the average number of trading days in a year.21
Since the volatility of daily interest rates is substantially smaller than that of daily stock
returns, the main effect of including the risk-free rate in the Sharpe ratio is that of a (time-
varying) drift-adjustment. For this reason, our use of monthly interest rates in the earlier
samples is unlikely to affect the results in any important way.
[Insert Table V]
- 19 -

PDF PAGE 24
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Similar to Table III, Table V presents the performance results of the best technical
trading rule in each of the sample periods. The table reports the performance measure
(i.e., Sharpe ratio) along with White’s Reality Check p-value and the nominal p-value.22
It is clear from Table II that the trading rules selected from the full universe by the
Sharpe ratio criterion again tend to be based on a relatively short sample using 2-20 days
of price information. Table V shows that the best model according to the Sharpe ratio
criterion generates a p-value well below 0.002 in all but one of the samples for the full
universe of trading rules. Interestingly, the best model chosen from the BLL universe
does not appear to be significant in several of the sample periods. Also, the performance
of the best rule in the full universe increases substantially relative to the best rule
considered by BLL. Over the full 100-year sample on the Dow Jones Industrial Average,
the Sharpe ratio for the buy-and-hold strategy is a mere 0.034, while the best-performing
trading rule in the BLL and full universe produces Sharpe ratios of 0.39 and 0.82,
respectively.
[Insert Figure 4]
[Insert Figure 5]
For the first two subperiods, Figure 4 and Figure 5 plot the sequence of Sharpe ratios
based on the full set of models in contention alongside the p-value for the null that the
highest Sharpe ratio equals zero. The most interesting graph appears for the second
subperiod (Figure 5). The maximum Sharpe ratio is initially about 0.44. As the first 500
models get inspected, the p-value increases from 0.05 to above 0.60, only to fall well
below 0.01 after a superior trading rule is introduced around model number 500.
Towards the end of the universe of trading rules, the p-value increases from close to zero
to a level around 0.056, thus displaying the effects of data-snooping as no improvements
occur in the Sharpe ratio despite a widening of the span of trading rules.
- 20 -

PDF PAGE 25
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
These experiments also suggest why the alternative procedure of using a simple
Bonferroni bound to assess the significance of the best-performing trading rule would
give misleading results. Since the performance of the best trading rule drawn from the
full universe is not known when considering only a subset of trading rules, the Bonferroni
bound on the p-value cannot possibly be used to account for data-snooping. A researcher
might believe that, say, the BLL trading rules are the result of traders considering an
original set of 8,000 rules, in which case the Bonferroni bound on the p-value would be
obtained as 8,000 times the smallest nominal p-value. But this leads to meaningless
results: in subperiod 4, the Bonferroni bound simply states that the p-value is less than 1,
while in fact the bootstrap p-value for the best trading rule selected from the full universe
is around 0.05.
C. Performance of the Bootstrap Snooper
In this subsection we carry out a simple check on the performance of White’s Reality
Check methodology by comparing the actual performance measure f to the
k
*
bootstrapped values of the performance measure f , for k = 1,…,l trading rules and i =
k,i
1,…,B bootstrap samples (l = 7,846 and B = 500). 23
[Insert Figure 6]
[Insert Figure 7]
The results are displayed in Figures 6 and 7. For each of the k models and for both the
mean return and Sharpe ratio criteria applied to the 100-year DJIA sample, these figures
*
provide a histogram of the realized probability that f is greater than f across the full
k,i k
universe of trading rules. Note that the distribution is closely centered around one-half,
suggesting that White’s Reality Check methodology is performing as it should. Also, the
results are very similar for both performance measures. 24
- 21 -

PDF PAGE 26
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Calculation of the overall probability, across all trading rules and bootstrap samples, that
*
f exceeds f yields a value of 0.489 for both the mean return and Sharpe ratio
k,i k
criteria. Omitting outliers caused by infrequent trading yields a probability of 0.508 for
both performance measures.
D. The Effects of Nonsynchronous Trading
Another issue to consider is nonsynchronous trading. If some of the closing prices on the
Dow Jones Industrial Average are stale, they may not reflect the latest information. In
such a case, the technical trading rules and the cumulative wealth rule would not be able
to obtain the closing price when the markets open the following day. Although
nonsynchronous trading effects are likely to be relatively small for the stocks included in
the DJIA, it is possible that some do exist, especially on low volume days.25 To address
this issue, we follow Ready (1997) and let a trading signal observed on day t be
implemented on the following day, t+1. We then perform the bootstrap experiment on
the full universe of trading rules and the 100-year DJIA sample using the delayed signals.
The results are quite interesting. The best rule according to the mean return criterion is a
variable moving average with a band filter where the fast moving average is calculated
over two days, the slow moving average is calculated over 75 days, and a 0.001 band is
applied. For the Sharpe ratio criterion, the best rule is a fixed moving average with a fast
MA of 20 days, a slow MA of 75 days, and a fixed holding period of five days. Not
surprisingly, the best rules in this experiment are of a longer duration than those where
the trading signals are implemented immediately.
The mean return of the best rule is 7.8 percent with a Reality Check p-value of nearly
zero (i.e., less than 0.002), indicating that the best rule is still highly significant. Note
that this is true even though the performance is far less than the best from the standard
experiment of 17.2 percent. The Sharpe ratio of the best rule is 0.34 with a Reality
Check p-value of 0.26, suggesting that the best rule, according to the Sharpe ratio
criterion, is no longer significant.26
- 22 -

PDF PAGE 27
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
One further item of interest is the performance of the cumulative wealth rule under this
regime. The cumulative wealth rule manages to outperform the benchmark with a mean
return of 4.6 percent. The nominal p-value is nearly zero (i.e., less than 0.002).
V. Out-of-Sample Results
The data used in the study by BLL finish in 1986. This leaves us with a ten-year post-
sample period in which a genuine out-of-sample performance experiment can be
conducted. We do so using the Dow Jones portfolio originally studied by BLL, and we
also use prices on the S&P 500 futures contract that has traded since 1984 and hence
covers a commensurate period. Lo and MacKinlay (1990) recommend just such a ten-
year out-of-sample experiment as a way of purging the effects of data-snooping biases
from the analysis.
There is a distinct advantage associated with using the futures data set: the experiment on
the DJIA data ignores dividends (which are not available on a daily basis for the full 100-
year period), while these are not a concern for the futures contract. Furthermore, while
the assumption that investors could have taken short positions in the DJIA contract
throughout the entire period 1897–1996 may not be realistic, it would have been very
easy for an investor to have gone short in the S&P 500 futures contract. Finally, it is
possible that while the technical trading rules considered by BLL generated profits before
transaction costs, accounting for such costs and data-snooping effects could change their
findings.27 In the full universe and over the 100-year period 1897–1996, the best-
performing trading rule for the Dow Jones Industrial Average earned a mean annualized
return of 17.17 percent resulting from 6,310 trades (63.1 per year), giving a break-even
transaction cost level of 0.27 percent per trade. We do not have historical series on
transaction costs, and these would also seem to depend on the size of the trade; so it
seems difficult to assess this number. Transaction costs are likely to have been higher
than 0.27 percent at the beginning of the sample, but less by the end of the sample.
Ultimately, the transaction cost argument is best evaluated using a trading strategy in a
futures contract, such as the S&P 500, where transactions costs are quite modest.
- 23 -

PDF PAGE 28
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
The S&P 500 futures data are provided by Pinnacle Data Corporation. The prices from
the nearest futures contract are employed with a rollover date of the 9th of the delivery
month for the contract. That is, any position maintained in the current contract is closed
out, and a new position is opened, according to the trading rule, on the 9th of March, June,
September, and December. A series of returns is created from each of the contracts
which is linked together at the rollover dates. Starting with the price of the S&P 500
futures contract at the beginning of the series, a new price series is generated from the
returns.
A quick first way of testing the merits of technical trading rules is by considering the
performance of the best trading rule, selected by the end of 1986, in the subsequent ten-
year trading period. The five-day moving average rule selected from the full universe
produces a mean return of 2.8 percent with a nominal p-value of 0.322 for the period
1987 to 1996, indicating that the best trading rule, as of the end of 1986, did not continue
to generate valuable economic signals in the subsequent ten-year period.
[Insert Figure 8]
Figure 8 presents graphs for the evolution in the maximum performance statistic and the
Reality Check p-value across the 26 trading rules considered by BLL applied to the out-
of-sample period. The third and fourth trading rules improve substantially on the
maximum mean return statistic and the addition of these rules leads to decreases in the p-
value. By the end of the sample, the maximum mean return statistic is around 8.5 percent
per year. The p-value starts out around 0.3, decreases to around 0.13, but then slowly
increases to 0.15. Such increases in the p-value, in the absence of improvements over the
best performing trading rule, vividly illustrate the importance of jointly considering all
the trading rules when drawing conclusions about the performance of the best-performing
trading rule. The p-value for the best-performing trading rule, considered in isolation, is
0.05. The evidence that the best trading rule can produce superior performance is even
weaker when the Sharpe ratio criterion is used to measure performance. For this
- 24 -

PDF PAGE 29
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
criterion, the p-value of the best model chosen from the BLL universe terminates at 0.72
when data-snooping is accounted for (see Figure 9) and is 0.12 when the trading rule is
naively considered in isolation.
[Insert Figure 9]
[Insert Figure 10]
Consider next the full universe of 7,846 trading rules for the S&P 500 futures data over
the period 1984–1996. For models selected by the mean return criterion, Figure 10
demonstrates perhaps more clearly than any other graph the importance of controlling for
data-snooping. After the first few trading rules are considered, the p-value falls to around
0.3, but it quickly increases to around 0.6 as no improvement over the best-performing
trading rule occurs until after approximately 400 trading rules. Then the p-value drops
back below 0.4 only to increase to a level around 0.9 by the point the final trading rule
has been evaluated. As is clear from Figure 11, a very similar picture emerges for the
Sharpe ratio criterion, where the terminal data-snooping-adjusted p-value is 0.99.
[Insert Figure 11]
Notice the very strong conclusion we can draw from this finding. Even though a
particular trading rule is capable of producing superior performance of almost ten percent
per year during this sample period and has a p-value of 0.04 when considered in isolation,
the fact that this trading rule is drawn from a wide universe of rules means that its
effective data-snooping-adjusted p-value is actually 0.90. An even bigger contrast occurs
from using the Sharpe ratio criterion: here the snooping-adjusted and unadjusted p-values
are 0.99 and 0.000 (below 0.002), respectively. Indeed, data-snooping effects are very
important in assessing economic performance.
[Insert Table VI]
- 25 -

PDF PAGE 30
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
As a final exercise, we compute the out-of-sample performance of the recursive decision
rule described in Section IV. This rule follows the trading signal generated by the rule
that has produced the highest cumulative wealth as of the previous trading day. Table VI
provides summary statistics for the best-performing rule and the cumulative wealth rule,
for both the out-of-sample Dow Jones Industrial Average (1987–1996) and the Standard
and Poor’s 500 Futures (1984–1996). These rules are chosen with respect to the mean
return criterion. It is interesting to note that in both of these out-of-sample periods the
cumulative wealth rule does not perform well. In fact, the cumulative wealth rule applied
to the S&P 500 futures generates negative returns. Also, note that the best rule for the
Dow Jones Industrial Average results in only six trades, where each trade averages over
400 days. This is considerably greater than the average of 4.3 days per trade resulting
from the best rule over the full 100-year sample.
VI. Conclusion
This paper applies a new methodology that allows researchers to control for data-
snooping biases to compute the statistical significance of investment performance while
accounting for the dependencies resulting from investigating several investment rules.
We believe that this methodology deserves to be widely used in finance: there is an
obvious focus in finance on information and decision rules that can be used to predict
financial returns, but it is often forgotten that this predictability may be the result of a
large number of researchers’ joint search for a successful model specification with
predictive power. Many researchers, such as Merton (1987), have called for a remedy to
control for data-snooping biases, and the methodology in this paper provides just such a
tool. It summarizes in a single statistic the significance of the best-performing model
after accounting for data-snooping.
Besides being important in assessing the importance of data-snooping bias in
performance measurement studies, the approach of this paper also has substantial value to
investors who are searching for successful investment strategies. Suppose that, after
experimenting with a large number of decision rules, an investor comes up with what
appears to be a highly successful rule that outperforms the benchmark strategy. The
- 26 -

PDF PAGE 31
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
investor is then left with the task of assessing just how much of the performance is a
result of data-snooping, and how much is due to genuine superior performance. In the
presence of complicated dependencies across the rules being evaluated, this is a very
difficult question to answer, and only a bootstrap methodology such as the one offered in
this paper appears to be feasible. Furthermore, since the investor would know the exact
identity of the universe of investment rules from which the optimal rule is drawn, the
approach of this paper is eminently suited for such an assessment.
Our analysis allows us to reassess previous results on the performance of technical
trading rules. We find that the results of BLL appear to be robust to data-snooping, and,
indeed, there are trading rules which perform even better than the ones considered by
BLL. Hence their result that the best performing technical trading rule is capable of
generating profits when applied to the Dow Jones Industrial Average, stands up to
inspection for data-snooping effects. This finding is valid in all four subperiods
considered by BLL. However, we also find that the superior performance of the best
technical trading rule is not repeated in the out-of-sample experiment covering the ten-
year period 1987–1996. In this sample the results are completely reversed and the best
performing trading rule is not even statistically significant at standard critical levels. This
result is also borne out when data on a more readily tradable futures contract on the S&P
500 index are considered: again there is no evidence that any trading rule outperforms
over the sample period.
Three conclusions appear to be possible from these findings. First, the out-of-sample
results may simply not be representative, possibly because of the unusually large one-day
movement occurring on October 19, 1987. While this argument can never be rejected
outright, we want to emphasize that the out-of-sample trading period is rather long (3,291
days) which would seem to lend support to the claim that we can evaluate the trading
rules’ performance reasonably precisely in the post-sample period. Also, the out-of-
sample results are robust to whether or not data on 1987 are included in the sample. In a
finite sample, very large movements in stock prices such as those occurring on October
19, 1987 would, if anything, actually tend to improve the performance of the best trading
- 27 -

PDF PAGE 32
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
rule since some of the rules inevitably would have been short in the index on that date
and hence would have earned returns of 22 percent in a single day.28
Second, the 7846 trading rules that we consider may of course have been selected from
an even larger universe of rules. If this is the case, then the p-value adjusted for data-
snooping is biased towards zero under the assumption that the included rules are also the
ones that performed quite well during the historical sample period. While this
explanation is a logical possibility, the experiments reported in this paper also show that
it can only have merit as long as two conditions are both satisfied: the omitted trading
rules cannot improve substantially on the best-performing trading rule drawn from the
current universe, and the omitted trading rules should generate payoffs that are largely
orthogonal to the payoffs of the included trading rules so that they will increase the
effective span. We think that we have been sufficiently careful in choosing the number
and types of trading rules included in the adopted universe so that it is unlikely that these
conditions are simultaneously satisfied.
Third, it is possible that, historically, the best technical trading rule did indeed produce
superior performance, but that, more recently, the markets have become more efficient
and hence such opportunities have disappeared.29 This conclusion certainly seems to
match up well with the lower transaction costs and increased liquidity in the stock market
that may have helped to remove possible short-term patterns in stock returns.
Appendix A: Trading Rule Parameters
This appendix describes the parameterizations of the 7,846 trading rules used to generate
the full universe of rules under consideration.
A.1 Filter Rules
x = change in security price (x ´ price) required to initiate a position;
y = change in security price (y ´ price) required to liquidate a position;
- 28 -

PDF PAGE 33
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
e = used for an alternative definition of extrema where a low (high) can be defined as
the most recent closing price that is less (greater) than the n previous closing prices;
c = number of days a position is held, ignoring all other signals during that time;
x = 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.035, 0.04, 0.045, 0.05, 0.06, 0.07, 0.08, 0.09,
0.1, 0.12, 0.14, 0.16, 0.18, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 [24 values];
y = 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2 [12 values];
e = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20 [8 values];
c = 5, 10, 25, 50 [4 values].
Noting that y must be less than x, there are 185 x-y combinations.
Number of filter rules = x + (x * e) + (x * c) + (x-y combinations)
= 24 + 192 + 96 + 185 = 497.
A.2 Moving Averages
n = number of days in a moving average;
m = number of fast-slow combinations of n;
b = fixed band multiplicative value;
d = number of days for the time delay filter;
c = number of days a position is held, ignoring all other signals during that time;
n = 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 200, 250 [15 values];
ån- 1
m = i = 105;
i=1
b = 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 [8 values];
d = 2, 3, 4, 5 [4 values];
c = 5, 10, 25, 50 [4 values].
Note that a one percent band filter and a ten-day holding period is applied to all
combinations of moving averages with a fast MA of one, two, and five days and a slow
- 29 -

PDF PAGE 34
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
MA of 50, 150, and 200 days. This addition of nine rules allows our universe of trading
rules to encompass all of BLL’s trading rules.
Number of rules = n + m + (b * (n + m)) + (d * (n + m)) + (c * (n + m)) + 9
= 15 + 105 + 960 + 480 + 480 + 9 = 2,049.
A.3 Support and Resistance
n = number of days in the support and resistance range;
e = used for an alternative definition of extrema where a low (high) can be defined as
the most recent closing price that is less (greater) than the n previous closing prices;
b = fixed band multiplicative value;
d = number of days for the time delay filter;
c = number of days a position is held, ignoring all other signals during that time;
n = 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 [10 values];
e = 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200 [10 values];
b = 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 [8 values];
d = 2, 3, 4, 5 [4 values];
c = 5, 10, 25, 50 [4 values].
Number of rules = [(1 + c) * (n + e)] + [(b * (n + e)) * (1 + c)] + [d * c * (n + e)]
= 100 + 800 + 320 = 1,220.
A.4 Channel Break-Outs
n = number of days for the channel;
x = difference between the high price and the low price (x ´ high price) required to
form a channel;
b = fixed band multiplicative value;
c = number of days a position is held, ignoring all other signals during that time;
n = 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 [10 values];
- 30 -

PDF PAGE 35
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
x = 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.05, 0.075, 0.10, 0.15 [8 values];
b = 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 [8 values];
c = 5, 10, 25, 50 [4 values].
Noting that b must be less than x, there are 43 x-b combinations.
Number of rules = (n * x * c) + [n * b * (x-b combinations)]
= 320 + 1,720 = 2,040.
A.5 On-Balance Volume Averages
n = number of days in a moving average;
m = number of fast-slow combinations of n;
b = fixed band multiplicative value;
d = number of days for the time delay filter;
c = number of days a position is held, ignoring all other signals during that time;
n = 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 200, 250 [15 values];
ån- 1
m = i = 105;
i=1
b = 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05 [8 values];
d = 2, 3, 4, 5 [4 values];
c = 5, 10, 25, 50 [4 values].
Number of rules = n + m + (b * (n + m)) + (d * (n + m)) + (c * (n + m))
= 15 + 105 + 960 + 480 + 480 = 2,040.
Appendix B: Reality Check Technical Results
For the convenience of the reader, we replicate the main results of White (1997) and
briefly interpret these. In what follows, the notation corresponds to that of the text unless
otherwise noted.
- 31 -

PDF PAGE 36
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Let P denote the probability measure governing the behavior of the time series {Z}.
t
Also, Þ denotes convergence in distribution, while ¾ ¾ p® denotes convergence in
probability. In White’s (1997) notation, used here, f * = f (Z, b *) where b * = plim b$ . As
T
n
no parameters are estimated in our application, we have written E( f ) in the text.
Proposition 2.1: Suppose that n 1/2 ( f – E( f * )) Þ N(0, W ) for W positive semi-definite
and suppose that E( f *) > E( f *), for all k = 2, ..., l. Then P[ f > f for all k = 2,
1 k 1 k
..., l] ® 1 as T ® ¥ . If in addition E( f *) > 0, then for any 0 £ c < E( f *),
1 1
P [f >c] ® 1 as T ® ¥ .
1
The first conclusion guarantees that the best model eventually has the best estimated
performance relative to the benchmark, with probability approaching certainty. The
second conclusion ensures that if the best model beats the benchmark, then this is
eventually revealed by a positive estimated performance relative to the benchmark. The
next result provides the basis for hypothesis tests of the null of no predictive superiority
over the benchmark, based on the predictive model selection criterion.
Proposition 2.2: Suppose that n 1/2 ( f – E( f * ) ) Þ N(0, W ) for W positive semi-definite.
Then
max n 1/2 { f – E( f *)} Þ V º max { Z } (B1)
k k l k
k=1,...,l k=1,...,l
and
min n 1/2 { f – E( f *)} Þ W º min { Z }, (B2)
k k l k
k=1,...,l k=1,...,l
where Z is an l x 1 vector with components Z , k = 1, ..., l, distributed as N(0, W ).
k
Corollary 2.4: Under the conditions of Theorem 2.3 of White (1997), we have
r ( L [V * | Z , ..., Z ], L [ max n 1/2 ( f – E( f *) ) ] ) ¾ ¾ p® 0 (B3)
l 1 T+t k k
k=1,...,l
- 32 -

PDF PAGE 37
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
and
r ( L [W* | Z , ..., Z ], L [ min n 1/2 ( f – E( f *) ) ] ) ¾ ¾ p® 0, (B4)
l 1 T+t k k
k=1,...,l
where
V * º max n 1/2 ( f *– f ), (B5)
l k k
k=1,...,l
W* º min n 1/2 ( f *– f ). (B6)
l k k
k=1,...,l
L denotes the probability law of the indicated random variable, and r is any distance
metric on the space of probability laws.
Thus, by comparing V to the quantiles of a large sample of realizations of V *, we can
l l
compute a p-value appropriate for testing H : max E( f *) £ 0, that is, that the best
o k
k=1,...,l
model has no predictive superiority relative to the benchmark. White (1997) calls this the
“Reality Check p-value.”
The level of the test can be driven to zero at the same time that the power approaches one
1/2
according to the next result, as the test statistic diverges to infinity at a rate n under the
alternative.
Proposition 2.5: Suppose that conditions A.1(a) or A.1(b) of White’s (1997) Appendix
hold, and suppose that E( f *) > 0 and E( f *) > E( f *), for all k = 2, ..., l.
1 1 k
Then for any 0 < c < E( f *), P[V > n 1/2 c ] ® 1 as T ® ¥ .
1 l
m
Corollary 5.1: Let g: U ® Â (U Ì Â ) be continuously differentiable such that the
Jacobian of g, Dg, has full row rank 1 at E[ h ] Î U, k = 0, ..., l. Suppose that the
k
assumptions of White (1997, Corollary 5.1) hold. If H = 0 (the Jacobian of h) or (n/R)
log log R ® 0 then for f * computed using Politis and Romano’s stationary bootstrap
- 33 -

PDF PAGE 38
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
r ( L [n 1/2 ( f *– f ) | Z 1 , ..., Z T+t ], L [n 1/2 ( f – m )] ) ¾ ¾ p® 0, (B7)
where r and L [ × ] are as previously defined, f º (f ,..., f )', f º g(h )- g(h ),
1 l k k 0
m º (m ,...,m ), and m º g(E[h ])- g(E[h ]).
1 l k k 0
Maintaining the original definitions of V * and W* in terms of f and f *, we have
l l k k
Corollary 5.2: Under the conditions of Corollary 5.1, we have
r ( L [V l * | Z 1 , ..., Z T+t ], L [ max n 1/2 ( f k – m k ) ] ) ¾ ¾ p® 0 (B8)
k=1,...,l
and
r ( L [W l * | Z 1 , ..., Z T+t ], L [ min n 1/2 ( f k – m k ) ] ) ¾ ¾ p® 0 . (B9)
k=1,...,l
The test is performed by imposing the element of the null least favorable to the
alternative, i.e., m = 0, k = 1, ..., l; thus the Reality Check p-value is obtained by
k
comparing V to the Reality Check order statistics, obtained as described in Section II.
l
As before, the test statistic diverges to infinity at the rate n 1/2 under the alternative.
Proposition 5.3: Suppose the conditions of Corollary 5.1 hold, and suppose that E( f *) >
1
0 and E( f *) > E( f *), for all k = 2, ..., l. Then for any 0 < c < E( f *), P [V >n1/2c]
1 k 1 l
® 1 as T ® ¥ .
Note that it is reasonable to expect the conditions required for the above results to hold
for the data we are examining. As pointed out by BLL, while stock prices do not seem to
be drawn from a stationary distribution, the compounded daily returns (log-differenced
prices) can plausibly be assumed to satisfy the stationarity and dependence conditions
sufficient for the bootstrap to yield valid results. It is possible to imagine time series for
returns with highly persistent dependencies in the higher order moments that might
- 34 -

PDF PAGE 39
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
violate the mixing conditions of White (1997), but the standard models for stock returns
do not exhibit such persistence.
Appendix C: The Stationary Bootstrap
Politis and Romano (1994) present a resampling technique, called the stationary
bootstrap, that can be applied to a strictly stationary and weakly dependent time series to
generate a pseudo-time series that is stationary. Here we describe our application of the
stationary bootstrap and the algorithm used to generate the pseudo-time series of returns.
The notation corresponds to that of the text.
T
We use a resampled version of f = n - 1 å f to deliver the Reality Check p-value for
t+1
t=R
testing the hypothesis that the selected (best) model has no predictive superiority over the
benchmark model. The resampled statistic is computed as
T
f * =n - 1 å f * , (C1)
t+1
t=R
f
t
*
+1
º f ( Zq
(t)+1
, b ), t = R,…,T, (C2)
and q (t) is a random index chosen according to the Politis and Romano stationary
bootstrap algorithm. For this, we choose a priori a “smoothing parameter” q = q , 0 < q
n n
£ 1, q ® 0, nq ® ¥ as n ® ¥ , and proceed as follows:
n n
1. Set t = R. Draw q (t) = q (R) at random, independently and uniformly from {R,...,T}.
2. Increment t by 1. If t > T, stop. Otherwise, draw a standard uniform random variable
U independently of all other random variables.
(a) If U < q, draw q (t) at random, independently and uniformly, from {R,...,T};
(b) If U ³ q, expand the block by setting q (t) = q (t – 1) + 1; if q (t) > T, reset q (t) = R;
- 35 -

PDF PAGE 40
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
3. Repeat step 2.
Thus, the stationary bootstrap resamples blocks of varying length from the original data,
where the block length follows the geometric distribution, with mean block length 1/q. A
large value of q is appropriate for data with little dependence, and a smaller value of q is
appropriate for data which exhibit more dependence.
The value of q chosen in our experiments is 0.1, corresponding to a mean block length of
ten. This value appears to be reasonable given the weak correlation in daily stock
returns. Furthermore, we find that the results of the paper are not sensitive to the choice
of q.
[Insert Table CI]
Table CI provides White’s Reality Check p-value for several sample and criterion
combinations, along with three separate values of the smoothing parameter. The values
of q correspond to mean block lengths of 100, 10, and 2. We include both ends of the
spectrum by reporting White’s p-value for both the 100 year DJIA sample, where the best
rule significantly outperforms the benchmark (i.e., a Reality Check p-value less than
0.002), and the S&P 500 futures sample where the best rule clearly does not out-perform
the benchmark. Note that there is no fluctuation for the p-values that are near zero, and
that the p-values for the S&P 500 futures fluctuate to a very small degree. Thus, we can
be assured that the results we have obtained are robust to our choice of the smoothing
parameter q.
- 36 -

PDF PAGE 41
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
References
Blume, Lawrence, David Easley, and Maureen O’Hara, 1994, Market statistics and
technical analysis: The role of volume, Journal of Finance 49, 153-181.
Brock, William, Josef Lakonishok, and Blake LeBaron, 1992, Simple technical trading
rules and the stochastic properties of stock returns, Journal of Finance 47, 1731-
1764.
Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading volume and
serial correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 905-939.
Cowles, Alfred, 1933, Can stock market forecasters forecast?, Econometrica 1, 309-324.
Coy, Peter, 1997, He who mines data may strike fool’s gold, Business Week June 16,
1997, 40.
Diebold, Francis X., 1998, Elements of Forecasting (South-Western College Publishing,
Cincinnati, Ohio)
Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto S. Mariano, 1995, Comparing predictive accuracy,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13, 253-265.
Edwards, Robert D., and John Magee, 1992, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (John
Magee, Inc., Boston).
Efron, Bradley, 1979, Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife, Annals of
Statistics 7, 1-26.
Fama, Eugene, and Marshall Blume, 1966, Filter rules and stock-market trading, Journal
of Business 39, 226-241.
Foster, F. Douglas, Tom Smith, and Robert E. Whaley, 1997, Assessing goodness-of-fit
of asset pricing models: The distribution of the maximal R2, Journal of Finance 52,
591-607.
Gartley, H. M., 1935, Profits in the Stock Market (Lambert-Gann Publishing Company,
Pomeroy, Washington).
Granville, Joseph, 1963, Granville’s New Key to Stock Market Profits (Prentice Hall,
New Jersey).
Hamilton, William P., 1922, The Stock Market Barometer (Harper and Brothers
Publishers, New York).
- 37 -

PDF PAGE 42
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Jensen, Michael C., and George A. Bennington, 1970, Random walks and technical
theories: Some additional evidence, Journal of Finance 25, 469-482.
Kaufman, Perry J., 1987, The New Commodity Trading Systems and Methods (John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York).
Levich, Richard, and Lee Thomas, III, 1993, The significance of technical trading-rule
profits in the foreign exchange market: A bootstrap approach, Journal of
International Money and Finance 12, 451-474.
Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1990, Data-snooping biases in tests of
financial asset pricing models, The Review of Financial Studies 3, 431-467.
Merton, Robert, 1987, On the state of the efficient market hypothesis in financial
economics, in Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, and John Bossons, eds
- 38 -

PDF PAGE 43
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Sweeney, Richard J., 1988, Some new filter rule tests: Methods and results, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 23, 285-300.
Taylor, Mark, 1992, The use of technical analysis in the foreign exchange market,
Journal of International Money and Finance 11, 304-314.
Taylor, Stephen, 1994, Trading futures using a channel rule: A study of the predictive
power of technical analysis with currency examples, Journal of Futures Markets 14,
215-235.
West, Kenneth D., 1996, Asymptotic inference about predictive ability, Econometrica 64,
1067-1084.
White, Halbert, 1997, A reality check for data snooping, Technical report, NRDA, San
Diego, CA.
- 39 -

PDF PAGE 44
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table I
Best Technical Trading Rules under the Mean Return Criterion
This table reports the historically best-performing trading rule, chosen with respect to the mean return
criterion, in each sample period for both of the trading rule universes: the Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron
(BLL) universe with 26 rules and our full universe with 7,846 rules.
Sample BLL Universe of Trading Rules Full Universe of Trading Rules
Subperiod 1 50-day variable moving average, 0.01 5-day support & resistance, 0.005
(1897-1914) band band, 5-day holding period
Subperiod 2 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average
(1915-1938) band
Subperiod 3 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
2-day on-balance volume
(1939-1962) band
Subperiod 4
150-day variable moving average 2-day on-balance volume
(1962-1986)
90 Years 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average
(1897-1986) band
100 Years 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average
(1897-1996) band
Out-of-Sample
Subperiod 5 200-day variable moving average, filter rule, 0.12 position initiation,
(1987-1996) 0.01 band 0.10 position liquidation
S&P 500 Futures
200-day variable moving average 30 and 75-day on-balance volume
(1984-1996)
- 40 -

PDF PAGE 45
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table II
Best Technical Trading Rules under the Sharpe Ratio Criterion
This table reports the historically best-performing trading rule, chosen with respect to the Sharpe ratio
criterion, in each sample period for both of the trading rule universes: the Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron
(BLL) universe with 26 rules and our full universe with 7,846 rules.
Sample BLL Universe of Trading Rules Full Universe of Trading Rules
Subperiod 1 20-day channel rule, 0.075 width, 5-
150-day trading range break-out
(1897-1914) day holding period
Subperiod 2 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average, 0.001 band
(1915-1938) band
Subperiod 3 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
2-day moving average, 0.001 band
(1939-1962) band
Subperiod 4 2 and 200-day fixed moving average,
2-day moving average, 0.001 band
(1962-1986) 10-day holding period
90 Years 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average, 0.001 band
(1897-1986) band
100 Years 50-day variable moving average, 0.01
5-day moving average, 0.001 band
(1897-1996) band
Out-of-Sample
Subperiod 5 150-day fixed moving average, 10- 200-day channel rule, 0.150 width, 50-
(1987-1996) day holding period day holding period
S&P 500 Futures 200-day fixed moving average, 0.01 20-day channel rule, 0.01 width, 10-
(1984-1996) band, 10-day holding period day holding period
- 41 -

PDF PAGE 46
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table III
Performance of the Best Technical Trading Rules under the Mean Return Criterion
This table presents the performance results of the best technical trading rule, chosen with respect to the
mean return criterion, in each of the sample periods. Results are provided for both the Brock, Lakonishok,
and LeBaron (BLL) universe of technical trading rules and our full universe of rules. The table reports the
performance measure (i.e., the annualized mean return) along with White’s Reality Check p-value and the
nominal p-value. The nominal p-value is that which results from applying the Reality Check methodology
to the best trading rule only, thereby ignoring the effects of the data-snooping.
BLL Universe of Trading Rules Full Universe of Trading Rules
Sample Mean White's Nominal Mean White's Nominal
Return p-value p-value Return p-value p-value
Subperiod 1
9.52 0.021 0.000 16.48 0.000 0.000
(1897-1914)
Subperiod 2
13.90 0.000 0.000 20.12 0.000 0.000
(1915-1938)
Subperiod 3
9.46 0.000 0.000 25.51 0.000 0.000
(1939-1962)
Subperiod 4
7.87 0.004 0.000 23.82 0.000 0.000
(1962-1986)
90 Years
10.11 0.000 0.000 18.65 0.000 0.000
(1897-1986)
100 Years
9.39 0.000 0.000 17.17 0.000 0.000
(1897-1996)
Out-of-Sample
Subperiod 5
8.63 0.154 0.055 14.41 0.341 0.004
(1987-1996)
S&P 500 Futures
4.25 0.421 0.204 9.43 0.908 0.042
(1984-1996)
- 42 -

PDF PAGE 47
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table IV
Technical Trading Rule Summary Statistics: 100-Year Dow Jones Industrial
Average Sample (1897–1996) with the Mean Return Criterion
This table provides summary statistics, White’s Reality Check p-value, and the nominal p-value for the
best-performing rule (the simple five-day moving average), chosen with respect to the mean return
criterion, and the recursive cumulative wealth rule, over the full 100-year sample of the Dow Jones
Industrial Average. The nominal p-value is that which results from applying the Reality Check
methodology to the best trading rule only, thereby ignoring the effects of the data-snooping. The
cumulative wealth trading rule bases today’s signal on the best trading rule as of yesterday, according to
total accumulated wealth. The recursive cumulative wealth rule is not the best trading rule ex post, thus the
Reality Check p-value does not apply.
Summary Statistics Best Rule Cumulative Wealth Rule
Annualized average return 17.2% 14.9%
Nominal p-value 0.000 0.000
White's Reality Check p-value 0.000 n/a*
Total number of trades 6,310 6,160
Number of winning trades 2,501 2,476
Number of losing trades 3,809 3,684
Average number of days per trade 4.3 4.2
Average return per trade 0.29% 0.26%
Number of long trades 3,155 3,103
Number of long winning trades 1,389 1,372
Number of long losing trades 1,766 1,731
Average number of days per long trade 4.7 4.6
Average return per long trade 0.39% 0.35%
Number of short trades 3,155 3,057
Number of short winning trades 1,112 1,104
Number of short losing trades 2,043 1,953
Average number of days per short trade 3.9 3.8
Average return per short trade 0.19% 0.16%
- 43 -

PDF PAGE 48
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table V
Performance of the Best Technical Trading Rules under the Sharpe Ratio Criterion
This table presents the performance results of the best technical trading rule, chosen with respect to the
Sharpe ratio criterion, in each of the sample periods. Results are provided for both the Brock, Lakonishok,
and LeBaron (BLL) universe of technical trading rules and our full universe of rules. The table reports the
performance measure (i.e., the Sharpe ratio) along with White’s Reality Check p-value and the nominal p-
value. The nominal p-value is that which results from applying the Reality Check methodology to the best
trading rule only, thereby ignoring the effects of the data-snooping.
BLL Universe of Trading Rules Full Universe of Trading Rules
Sample Sharpe White's Nominal Sharpe White's Nominal
Ratio p-value p-value Ratio p-value p-value
Subperiod 1
0.51 0.147 0.016 1.15 0.000 0.000
(1897-1914)
Subperiod 2
0.51 0.037 0.000 0.76 0.056 0.000
(1915-1938)
Subperiod 3
0.79 0.000 0.000 2.18 0.000 0.000
(1939-1962)
Subperiod 4
0.53 0.051 0.003 1.41 0.000 0.000
(1962-1986)
90 Years
0.45 0.000 0.000 0.91 0.000 0.000
(1897-1986)
100 Years
0.39 0.000 0.000 0.82 0.000 0.000
(1897-1996)
Out-of-Sample
Subperiod 5
0.28 0.721 0.127 0.87 0.903 0.000
(1987-1996)
S&P 500 Futures
0.23 0.702 0.165 0.66 0.987 0.000
(1984-1996)
- 44 -

PDF PAGE 49
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table VI
Technical Trading Rule Summary Statistics: Out-of-Sample Dow Jones Industrial
Average (1987–1996) and the Standard and Poor’s 500 Futures (1984–1996) with
the Mean Return Criterion
This table provides summary statistics, White’s Reality Check p-value, and the nominal p-value for the
best-performing rule, chosen with respect to the mean return criterion, and the recursive cumulative wealth
rule, for both the out-of-sample Dow Jones Industrial Average (1987–1996) and the Standard and Poor’s
500 Futures (1984–1996). The nominal p-value is that which results from applying the Reality Check
methodology to the best trading rule only, thereby ignoring the effects of the data-snooping. The
cumulative wealth trading rule bases today’s signal on the best trading rule as of yesterday, according to
total accumulated wealth. The recursive cumulative wealth rule is not the best trading rule ex post, thus the
Reality Check p-value does not apply.
Dow Jones Industrial Avg S&P 500 Futures
Cumulative Cumulative
Summary Statistics Best Rule Best Rule
Wealth Rule Wealth Rule
Annualized average return 14.4% 2.8% 9.4% -5.5%
Nominal P-value 0.000 0.322 0.042 0.895
White's Reality Check P-value 0.341 n/a* 0.908 n/a*
Total number of trades 6 676 43 210
Number of winning trades 4 234 22 56
Number of losing trades 2 442 21 154
Average number of days per trade 411.7 3.7 76.5 14.3
Average return per trade 34.38% 0.04% 3.00% -0.33%
Number of long trades 4 338 22 104
Number of long winning trades 3 140 12 31
Number of long losing trades 1 198 10 73
Average number of days per long trade 598.0 4.3 98.6 17.1
Average return per long trade 48.16% 0.24% 5.76% 0.16%
Number of short trades 2 338 21 106
Number of short winning trades 1 94 10 25
Number of short losing trades 1 244 11 81
Average number of days per short trade 39.0 3.2 53.4 11.6
Average return per short trade 6.82% -0.16% 0.12% -0.82%
- 45 -

PDF PAGE 50
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Table CI
Sensitivity of White’s Reality Check p-value to Changes in the Smoothing
Parameter q
This table provides White’s Reality Check p-value for several sample and criterion combinations, along
with three separate values of the smoothing parameter (i.e., 0.01, 0.1, and 0.5). The values of q correspond
to mean block lengths of 100, 10, and 2, respectively. The p-values reported are those derived from the full
universe of technical trading rules.
White's Reality Check p-value
Sample and Criterion q = 0.01 q = 0.1 q = 0.5
100 Years -- Mean Return Criterion 0.000 0.000 0.000
100 Years -- Sharpe Ratio Criterion 0.000 0.000 0.000
S&P 500 -- Mean Return Criterion 0.926 0.908 0.909
S&P 500 -- Sharpe Ratio Criterion 0.987 0.987 0.976
- 46 -

PDF PAGE 51
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Figure 1. Span of the Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (BLL) Universe of Trading
Rules versus the Full Universe of Trading Rules: Eigenvalues 1 to 200 of the Covariance
Matrix of Returns
The eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of returns are sorted in descending order for the Brock,
Lakonishok, and LeBaron (BLL) universe of trading rules (i.e., a 26 ´ 26 matrix), and for 500 randomly
chosen rules from the full universe of trading rules (i.e., a 500 ´ 500 covariance matrix), including the 26
BLL rules. Panel A plots the ten largest values in sorted descending order along the x-axis, where the y-
axis measures the eigenvalue. Panel B plots eigenvalues 11 to 200, again sorted in descending order.
Figure 2. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the Full
Universe According to the Mean Return Criterion: Subperiod 1 (1897–1914)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the mean annualized returns
experienced during the sample period. The thin line measures the best mean annualized return among the
set of trading rules i = 1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
Figure 3. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the Full
Universe According to the Mean Return Criterion: Subperiod 2 (1915–1938)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the mean annualized returns
experienced during the sample period. The thin line measures the best mean annualized return among the
set of trading rules i = 1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
Figure 4. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the Full
Universe According to the Sharpe Ratio Criterion: Subperiod 1 (1897–1914)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the Sharpe ratio experienced
during the sample period. The thin line measures the highest Sharpe ratio among the set of trading rules i =
1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value. Note that p-values
greater than 0.10 have been truncated at the top of the figure.
Figure 5. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the Full
Universe According to the Sharpe Ratio Criterion: Subperiod 2 (1915–1938)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the Sharpe ratio experienced
during the sample period. The thin line measures the highest Sharpe ratio among the set of trading rules i =
1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value. Note that p-values
greater than 0.10 have been truncated at the top of the figure.
- 47 -

PDF PAGE 52
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Figure 6. Histogram of the Observed Probability that the Bootstrapped Performance
Measure is Greater than the Actual Performance Measure, According to the Mean Return
Criterion: 100-Year Sample (1897 - 1996)
The observed probability is the number of bootstrap samples yielding a performance measure greater than
the actual performance measure, divided by the number of bootstrap samples (500). For a given probability
range, the y-axis measures the number of models (trading rules) from the full universe of 7,846 rules that
have a calculated probability within that range. The x-axis value, the probability range, indicates the upper
bound on the range of probability values, where the lower bound is provided by the next smaller upper
bound.
Figure 7. Histogram of the Observed Probability that the Bootstrapped Performance
Measure is Greater than the Actual Performance Measure, According to the Sharpe Ratio
Criterion: 100-Year Sample (1897 - 1996)
The observed probability is the number of bootstrap samples yielding a performance measure greater than
the actual performance measure, divided by the number of bootstrap samples (500). For a given probability
range, the y-axis measures the number of models (trading rules) from the full universe of 7,846 rules that
have a calculated probability within that range. The x-axis value, the probability range, indicates the upper
bound on the range of probability values, where the lower bound is provided by the next smaller upper
bound.
Figure 8. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the
Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (BLL) Universe According to the Mean Return
Criterion: Out-of-Sample, Subperiod 5 (1987–1996)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the mean annualized returns
experienced during the sample period. The thin line measures the best mean annualized return among the
set of trading rules i = 1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
Figure 9. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the
Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (BLL) Universe According to the Sharpe Ratio
Criterion: Out-of-Sample, Subperiod 5 (1987–1996)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the Sharpe ratio experienced
during the sample period. The thin line measures the highest Sharpe ratio among the set of trading rules i =
1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
- 48 -

PDF PAGE 53
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Figure 10. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the
Full Universe According to the Mean Return Criterion: S&P 500 Futures (1984–1996)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the mean annualized returns
experienced during the sample period. The thin line measures the best mean annualized return among the
set of trading rules i = 1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
Figure 11. Economic and Statistical Performance of the Best Model Chosen from the
Full Universe According to the Sharpe Ratio Criterion: S&P 500 Futures (1984–1996)
For a given trading rule, n, indexed on the x-axis, the scattered points plot the Sharpe ratio experienced
during the sample period. The thin line measures the highest Sharpe ratio among the set of trading rules i =
1,…,n, and the thick line measures the associated data-snooping adjusted p-value.
- 49 -

PDF PAGE 54
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
Footnotes
* University of California, San Diego. We would like to thank an anonymous referee, the
editor (René Stulz), and our discussant at the Western Finance Association meetings
(David Chapman) for many useful comments on the paper. The authors are grateful to
NeuralNet R&D Associates of San Diego, California for making available its proprietary
(patent pending) Reality Check software algorithms.
1 See, for example, Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), Fama and Blume (1966),
Kaufman (1987), Levich and Thomas (1993), Neftci (1991), Osler and Chang (1995),
Sweeney (1988), Taylor (1992), and Taylor (1994).
2 Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), page 1736.
3 Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), page 1743. BLL account for part of the
problem associated with data-snooping within the set comprising their 26 trading rules by
reporting the average performance of these trading rules. This can be regarded as the
expected performance of a trading rule randomly chosen from their universe, although it
does not measure the performance of the best trading rule.
4 A very early attempt at assessing the best performance of a set of 24 financial
forecasting services through use of a simple Monte Carlo procedure is presented in
Cowles (1933). We are grateful to Stephen Brown for bringing our attention to this.
5 Indeed, BLL report that they do not consider a larger set of trading rules than the 26
rules they report results for.
6 See also Lo and MacKinlay (1990) for a similar point.
7 We thank Blake LeBaron for providing us with the data set used in the BLL study.
8 Lo and MacKinlay (1990) quantify the data-snooping bias in cross-sectional tests of
asset pricing models where the firm characteristic used to sort stocks into portfolios is
correlated with the estimation error of the performance measure.
- 50 -

PDF PAGE 55
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
9 Note that the best trading rule, identified as the one with the highest average
continuously compounded rate of return, will also be the optimal trading rule for a risk-
averse investor with logarithmic utility defined over terminal wealth.
10 Levich and Thomas (1993), page 458.
11 Suppose that some technical trading rules can be found that unambiguously outperform
the benchmark over the sample period, but that these are based on technology (e.g.,
neural networks) that only became available after the end of the sample. Since the
technique used was not available to investors during the sample period, we do not believe
that such evidence would contradict weak-form market efficiency.
12 Gartley (1935), page 256.
13 The moving average for a particular day is calculated as the arithmetic average of
prices over the previous n days, including the current day. Thus, a fast moving average
has a smaller value of n than a slow moving average.
14 Hamilton (1922) and Rhea (1932) explain the Dow line in detail.
15 A subsample of the full universe of 7,846 trading rules is used due to computational
capacity constraints.
16 We refer to BLL, Table 1, for a description of the basic statistical properties of the data
set.
17 Annualized mean returns are calculated as the mean daily return over the duration of
the sample, multiplied by 252. The mean daily return is simply the total return divided
by the number of days in the sample.
18 Notice, however, that if the improvement is sufficiently small, then it is possible that
the data-snooping effect of searching for an improved model from a larger universe will
dominate the improved performance and hence will lead to a net increase in the p-value.
19 What appear to be vertical clusters of mean return points simply reflect the
- 51 -

PDF PAGE 56
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
performance of neighbor trading rules in a similar class as the parameters of the trading
rules are varied.
20 The Federal funds rate is the cost of borrowing immediately available funds, primarily
for one day. The effective rate is a weighted average of the reported rates at which
different amounts of the day’s trading through New York brokers occurs.
21 Examining the behavior of our interest rates in the first overlapping period (1925-1941,
193 observations), we find that monthly values for the stock exchange 90-day time loans
and the Fama/Bliss risk-free rates have a correlation of 0.964. To compare the
Fama/Bliss risk-free rates (monthly) to the Federal funds rates (daily), we convert the
risk-free rates to daily rates by applying the Fama/Bliss rate for a given month to all days
in that month. The overlap period of 1954-1996 (15,525 observations) produces a
correlation of 0.963.
22 The Sharpe ratio values are based on annualized returns which are calculated as the
continuously compounded daily return multiplied by 252.
23 We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this analysis.
24 There is a set of outlier models, about 300 trading rules, that have a probability at, or
*
near, zero that f will exceed f . This is a result of a trading rule having very few
k,i k
nonzero trading signals. In such a case, it is entirely possible that none of the 500
bootstrap samples will include any nonzero signals, thereby leading to a bootstrapped
performance measure that is always less than the actual performance measure that does
contain some nonzero trading signals. This is clearly not a problem for the results
reported in Tables I - VI since the selected trading rules generate multiple signals.
25 For example, Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) find that the first-order
autocorrelation in daily stock returns is higher when volume is low.
26 Ready (1997) also finds that, what he refers to as ‘price slippage’ effects, can account
for a substantial part of the profits generated by technical trading rules.
- 52 -

PDF PAGE 57
Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap
27 In the conclusion to their paper, BLL call for careful consideration of transaction costs
and explicitly recommend using futures data as a way of dealing with this issue. This is
particularly important for some of the rules selected from the full universe since these use
very short windows of the data, generate very frequent trading signals, and hence are
likely to generate substantial transaction costs.
28 Indeed, as shown in Table III, the best trading rule from the BLL universe under the
mean return criterion generates a mean return of 8.6 percent in the period from January
1987 through December 1996. However, the best rule (200-day variable moving average
with a one percent band) from the BLL universe in the period January 1988 through
December 1996 generates a mean return of only 5.6 percent. Furthermore, the large
universe provides a best rule during subperiod 5 that generates a mean return of 14.4
percent, where the best rule (20-day filter rule of 0.10) during the period beginning in
1988 provides a mean return of only 13.9 percent.
29 Ready (1997) also reports a decline in the ability of technical trading rules to predict
daily returns over the period 1990–1995.
- 53 -