
--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
BEYOND THE STATUS QUO: A C RITICAL ASSESSMENT OF
LIFECYCLE INVESTMENT ADVICE
Aizhan Anarkulova* Scott Cederburg† Michael S. O’Doherty‡
March 3, 2025§
Abstract
We challenge two tenets of lifecycle investing: (i) diversify across stocks and bonds and (ii)
reduce equity allocations with age. An optimal lifetime allocation of 33% domestic stocks, 67%
international stocks, 0% bonds, and 0% bills vastly outperforms age-based, stock-bond strategies in
building wealth, supporting retirement consumption, preserving capital, and generating bequests.
Our lifecycle model preserves crucial time-series and cross-sectional dependencies in asset returns
and addresses small sample issues in US data. Our investors prefer diversifying with international
stocks, not bonds. Target-date fund investors need 61% more pre-retirement savings to match the
all-equity strategy’s expected utility over retirement consumption and bequest.
JEL classifications: C15, D14, G11, G17, G51
Key words: Lifecycle asset allocation, retirement savings, target-date funds, long-horizon returns
*Goizueta Business School, Emory University . Email: aizhan.anarkulova@emory .edu.
†Eller College of Management, University of Arizona. Email: cederburg@arizona.edu.
‡Trulaske College of Business, University of Missouri. Email: odohertym@missouri.edu.
§We thank Turan Bali, Sreedhar Bharath, David Brown, John Campbell, David Cantor, Allison Cole, Filipe Correia, Tim de
Silva, Victor Duarte, Benjamin Felix, Scott Findley , Carolina Fugazza, Andrei Gonçalves, Clifton Green, Narasimhan Jegadeesh,
Veronika Krepely Pool, Zhongjin Gene Lu, Terry Nixon, Kunal Sachdeva, Rik Sen, John Shim, Mitch Towner, Chuck Trzcincka,
Harry Turtle, and seminar participants at the 2023 MSUFCU Conference on Financial Institutions and Investments, the 2023
Netspar Pension Day , the 2024 Eastern Finance Association, the 2024 SFS Cavalcade North America, the 2024 Southern
Finance Association, the 2025 American Finance Association, the 2025 ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, the 5th
LTI-Bank of Italy Workshop on Long-Term Investors’ Trends: Theory and Practice, Bluemetric, the Brandes Center at the
University of California, San Diego, Emory University , Erasmus University Rotterdam, the Georgia Institute of Technology ,
Lehigh University , Louisiana State University , the University of Arizona, the University of Arkansas, the University of Georgia,
and Utah State University for helpful comments and suggestions. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by
a research grant from Goizueta Business School of Emory University .

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
1 Introduction
Every year, Americans contribute about 5% of their total employee compensation to defined contri-
bution (DC) pension plans, with contributions of $621 billion in 2022 alone.1 They then face a question
that determines their financial fate: How should I invest my savings? Many consult financial advisors.
These professionals impart two central tenets of lifecycle investing — people should diversify across
stocks and bonds and the young should invest more heavily in stocks than the old — conceivably having
learned them from investments textbooks[e.g., Bodie, Kane, and Marcus (2024)] or CFA study materials
[e.g., Blanchett, Cordell, Finke, and Idzorek (2023) ]. Self-directed savers seek answers, perhaps read-
ing a popular book by Dave Ramsey , Suze Orman, or Tony Robbins. They receive similar advice [Choi
(2022)]. Academics may study the literature on lifecycle investing and reach the same conclusions[e.g.,
Viceira (2001); Campbell and Viceira (2002); and Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005)]. A great many
others are uninterested or overwhelmed, so they invest in the default option of their employer-sponsored
retirement plan. To safeguard these investors, the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA) created safe
harbors for employer DC plans. The most popular Qualified Default Investment Alternatives (QDIAs)
are portfolios that provide “long-term appreciation and capital preservation through a mix of equity and
fixed income exposures based on the participant’s age”[29 CFR § 2550.404c-5(e)(4)(i)].2 As such, reg-
ulators rely on “generally accepted investment theories”[29 CFR § 2550.404c-5(e)(4)] that mirror the
two principles to define QDIAs. In summary , these two tenets of investment advice — split investments
across stocks and bonds and invest more in stocks while young than while old — are close to being
uniformly given and universally followed.
In this paper, we challenge these principles of lifecycle investing. In our setting, a US couple opti-
mizes utility over real retirement consumption and bequest within a lifecycle model with labor income
risk, Social Security income, and longevity risk. Departing from the literature, we model asset class
returns such that we maintain the time-series and cross-sectional properties of stock and bond returns
that are evident in the data. We achieve this goal by using a block bootstrap approach that draws long
time series of consecutive asset class returns from the historical record. This approach is essential for
modeling the long-horizon returns that retirement savers may earn. These returns reflect the effects of
changing investment opportunities during the holding period without the need to pre-specify which par-
1The total DC plan contribution is from the 2024 Private Pension Plan Bulletin from the Department of Labor. The 5%
figure divides $621 billion in 2022 DC contributions by $13,437 billion in 2022 compensation of employees from Table 2.1 of
the national income and product accounts (NIPA) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
2See https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/2550.404c-5. Vanguard (2024) reports that target-date funds,
which are QDIAs under 29 CFR § 2550.404c-5(e)(4)(i), make up 98% of the QDIAs in DC plans.
1

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
ticular aspects are important to investors. Further, the investment horizons of retirement savers are very
long, extending 75 years or beyond for young savers. The relatively short history of US financial markets
poses a small sample problem given this setting, so we model forward-looking returns by examining the
history of asset class returns from a broad cross section of developed economies. Our comprehensive
dataset has returns on domestic stocks, international stocks, government bonds, and government bills
from 39 developed countries and spans more than 2,600 years of country-month return data.3
In the base case of our lifecycle model, we allow the couple to choose a fixed-weight investment
strategy with allocations to domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills. We impose con-
straints — no leverage and non-negative weights — that reflect reality for most retirement savers. The
couple’s optimal fixed-weight portfolio allocation is an all-equity strategy: 33% domestic stocks, 67%
international stocks, 0% bonds, and 0% bills. Although including international stocks in the investment
opportunity set is rare in the lifecycle investing literature, the large weight on this asset class underscores
the importance of allowing for international diversification.4
We compare the optimal fixed-weight strategy with two QDIA benchmarks: (i) a balanced strategy
with 60% domestic stocks and 40% bonds and (ii) a representative target-date fund (TDF) that employs
an age-based, stock-bond strategy . To achieve the same expected utility from retirement consumption
and bequest as a couple investing in the optimal strategy and saving 10.0% of labor income, a couple
using the balanced strategy must save 19.3% of income (i.e., nearly twice as much). Ex ante, the TDF
may be preferable to the optimal fixed-weight strategy because the TDF’s weights vary with age, in line
with conventional wisdom. Despite this seeming advantage, a couple investing in the TDF must save
16.1% (i.e., 61% more) to match the expected utility of the optimal fixed-weight strategy .
We examine the determinants of expected utility by studying four retiree outcomes: wealth at retire-
ment, retirement income, conservation of savings, and bequest at death. The all-equity strategy dom-
inates the QDIAs in long-term appreciation, with 50% more retirement wealth on average than the
3We consider multiple risky assets but no risk-free asset, similar to Campbell and Viceira (2002, 2005); Campbell, Chan,
and Viceira (2003); Sangvinatsos and Wachter (2005); Hoevenaars, Molenaar, Schotman, and Steenkamp (2008); Koijen,
Nijman, and Werker (2010); and Duarte, Fonseca, Goodman, and Parker (2024). A significant majority of studies include a
risk-free asset, either with a single risky asset [e.g., Merton (1969); Samuelson (1969); Viceira (2001); Cocco, Gomes, and
Maenhout (2005); Pástor and Stambaugh (2012); Dahlquist, Setty , and Vestman (2018); Gomes, Michaelides, and Zhang
(2022); Gomes and Smirnova (2023); and Choukhmane and de Silva (2024) ] or with multiple risky assets [e.g., Merton
(1971); Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997); Lynch (2001); Lynch and Tan (2010); and Catherine (2022)].
4Baxter and Jermann (1997) consider international diversification in the context of non-tradeable human capital, con-
cluding that investors should short domestic markets to hedge labor income risk. Michaelides (2003); Hnatkovska (2010);
Coeurdacier and Rey (2013); and Bretscher, Julliard, and Rosa (2016) study these hedging motives in lifecycle asset allo-
cation models featuring foreign stocks, concentrating on the roles of frictions, incomplete markets, and the strength of the
relation between human capital and domestic asset returns in rationalizing home bias. Several researchers examine interna-
tional diversification in settings without lifecycle features [e.g., Solnik (1974), Jorion (1985), Eun and Resnick (1988, 1994),
French and Poterba (1991), and Ang and Bekaert (2002, 2004)].
2

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
balanced strategy and 39% more than the TDF . This additional wealth generates a larger stream of
income for the retirees. Although this strong performance in capital appreciation may be expected, our
simulations also reveal a more striking result: the all-equity strategy compares favorably with the QDIAs
in capital preservation. Relative to households investing under a QDIA strategy , those allocating 33% to
domestic stocks and 67% to international stocks are much less likely to exhaust their savings. Under the
common 4% rule for retirement spending [Bengen (1994)], a couple using the balanced strategy has a
16.9% probability of running out of wealth. The TDF is even worse at 19.7%. In comparison, the prob-
ability for the optimal, all-equity strategy is low at 7.0%. Finally , the optimal strategy produces much
larger bequests than the QDIAs. Overall, the all-equity strategy — which is not a QDIA — beats the
QDIAs across the board in achieving the PPA goals of long-term appreciation and capital preservation.
The base case analysis requires the couple to maintain a constant portfolio allocation throughout
their lives. We also examine a time-varying strategy in which a household can choose a different set of
weights in each year of their life. The optimal strategy is all equity at every age except for a brief period
immediately upon retirement. Investors allocate 27% to fixed income (all in bills) upon retirement at
age 65, but that weight shrinks to 7% by age 68 and 0% by age 70. On average, the split of equity
across domestic and international stocks is similar to the base case. The optimal age-based strategy
gains little relative to the optimal fixed-weight strategy . A couple using an age-based approach must
save over 9.9% to achieve the same expected retirement utility as saving 10.0% in the base strategy .
We also allow the couple to condition their strategy on the domestic stock price-dividend ratio by
choosing different weights for each valuation quintile. In the bottom four quintiles of the price-dividend
ratio, the couple maintains an all-equity strategy . Only in the highest-price quintile does the household
allocate to bonds with a modest 9% weight. Conditioning allows for a small utility gain, as the couple
achieves the same expected utility as the optimal fixed-weight strategy by saving 9.7% of their income
(relative to the base of 10.0%). Nearly all of the utility gain is attributable to varying the domestic-
international stock allocation rather than to buying bonds. Overall, these analyses provide two take-
aways: (i) optimal allocations to bonds and bills are small or zero across specifications and (ii) the
time-varying strategies generate small utility gains relative to the optimal fixed-weight strategy .
We emphasize that we do not make any theoretical arguments that age does not matter for asset
allocation, that diversification is unimportant, or that bonds are inherently inappropriate for investors.
Rather, the properties of long-horizon returns, the inclusion of international stocks, a realistic no-
leverage constraint, and household concerns over real buying power lead to our empirical results on the
success of an all-equity strategy . Given this design, the couples are simply choosing to diversify using
3

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
international stocks rather than bonds.
Table I suggests why our couples prefer international stocks to bonds. Panel A reports the annualized
mean and standard deviation of returns for bonds and international stocks based on our comprehensive
dataset. Panel B shows variance ratios at horizons of one, ten, 20, and 30 years calculated as in Poterba
and Summers (1988), and Panel C presents correlations of log returns and log inflation. Bonds offer
modest average real returns (0.95% annually) compared with international stocks (7.03%), necessitat-
ing strong diversification benefits to make bonds attractive. At the one-month horizon, bonds appear
less risky with lower standard deviation (9.51% versus 23.26%) and lower correlation with domestic
stocks (0.21 versus 0.33). At the 30-year horizon, the picture changes. Bonds’ per-period variance
increases to 2.30 times the one-year variance, but international stocks’ decreases to 0.75 times. The
correlation of bonds with domestic stocks rises to 0.45, whereas international stocks maintain a steady
correlation.5 International stocks also help preserve real buying power with a weak correlation with
inflation (−0.01), whereas bonds do not (−0.78). Bonds ultimately seem unattractive for long-horizon
investors. They have low returns, high long-term variance, high long-term correlation with domestic
stocks, and high exposure to inflationary periods.
The long-term properties of international stocks versus bonds significantly impact portfolio choice,
even in a simple setting. Figure 1 illustrates this fact with optimal mean-variance weights. The second
moments of the asset returns are calculated from a one-month horizon (Panels A and B) or a 30-year
horizon scaled to a monthly level (Panels C and D). We consider cases without international stocks
(Panels A and C) or with international stocks (Panels B and D). Much of the lifecycle investing literature
focuses on domestic markets calibrated to short-term return moments. 6 Mean-variance investors con-
fronted with this design (Panel A) allocate substantially to bonds and bills. With risk aversion of four,
the optimal portfolio comprises 41% domestic stocks, 20% bonds, and 39% bills. When granted access
to international stocks (Panel B), the optimal allocation substantially shifts towards equity with 26% in
domestic stocks, 50% in international stocks, and 24% in bonds. Investors who prioritize long-horizon
return properties shun bonds. Domestic market investors with long horizons (Panel C) and risk aversion
of four optimally allocate 70% to domestic stocks and 30% to bills. The same long-horizon investors
with access to international stocks (Panel D) invest 26% in domestic stocks, 73% in international stocks,
5Also see Campbell and Viceira (2002, 2005); Bali, Demirtas, Levy , and Wolf (2009); and Siegel (2014) for evidence on
the risk of bonds over extended holding periods.
6It is possible to interpret the “stocks” asset class in previous lifecycle studies as representing a mix of domestic and inter-
national stock markets. If so, these studies make implicit assumptions about the relative weights across countries as well as
the interdependencies of domestic and foreign stock returns, inflation, and exchange rates. By separately modeling domestic
and international stocks, we allow investors to choose optimal weights and capture the rich patterns in returns, inflation, and
exchange rates across markets.
4

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
and 1% across bonds and bills. This case is closest to our lifecycle model’s specification, which includes
international stocks and preserves time-series dependencies in returns with the block bootstrap. The
simple mean-variance setting thus captures the intuition behind our all-equity findings. In the remain-
der of our study , we use a rich lifecycle model to formalize the importance of properly modeling asset
class returns.
Our couples’ aversion to bonds persists across a wide range of model specifications and parameter
choices. Our results are insensitive to the sample period (i.e., restricting to post-World War II), bootstrap
design, risk aversion, strength of the bequest motive, retirement withdrawal strategy , retirement age,
contribution rate, and household type (e.g., single versus couple). Our findings are also not driven by
small countries, countries with smaller stock markets, or the inclusion of the US in the sample. Our
base case is a median investor in Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song’s (2021) model of stochastic
labor income. We deviate from the base case by considering a range of initial income and human
capital parameters, and all household types choose similar all-equity strategies. We also introduce
correlation between labor income and domestic stock returns using a Gaussian copula; investors adjust
their allocation across domestic and international stocks, but they do not buy bonds.
We impose a no-leverage constraint in our base case. This constraint is realistic for most retirement
savers, but Asness (1996) nevertheless argues that investors should lever up a 60% /40% domestic
stock/bond strategy rather than invest 100% in stocks. We consider hypothetical couples who can
borrow up to 100% of wealth at a margin rate equal to the bill yield plus a spread. With a margin
spread of 1.4% (the lowest available spread as of April 2024), the couple borrows 55% of their wealth
and essentially levers up the optimal fixed-weight strategy from our base case by allocating 34% to
domestic stocks and 66% to international stocks. To achieve the same expected utility as saving 10.0%
and using this optimal levered strategy , Asness’s (1996) preferred strategy of 60% domestic stocks, 40%
bonds, and 55% borrowing requires a 24.4% savings rate.
Finally , we address potential concerns about our treatment of the consumption-saving decision and
the retirement age decision. We adopt a static optimization approach out of necessity due to our block
bootstrap simulation design, and our base case assumes a constant contribution rate and exogenous
retirement age. When we replace the constant contribution rate with the age- and income-based contri-
bution rates estimated by Parker, Schoar, Cole, and Simester (2023) for US households, the couple opti-
mally chooses the same all-equity portfolio with 33% in domestic stocks and 67% in international stocks.
If we allow couples to choose an optimal retirement age considering their income, wealth level, and
expected Social Security benefits, their optimal portfolio matches the one from the base case. Although
5

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
these aspects of dynamic lifecycle models are important to investors’ utility , they do not interact strongly
with portfolio choice in our setting.
We contribute to the recent normative literature on the optimal design of lifecycle investment strate-
gies [e.g., Michaelides and Zhang (2017, 2022); Dahlquist, Setty , and Vestman (2018); Kraft, Munk,
and Weiss (2019); Gomes, Michaelides, and Zhang (2022); and Duarte, Fonseca, Goodman, and Parker
(2024)]. Our primary contribution to the lifecycle literature is our modeling of the investment opportu-
nity set. Several classic studies assume constant investment opportunities with returns that are normally
or lognormally distributed [e.g., Merton (1969); Viceira (2001); Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005);
and Gomes and Michaelides (2005)]. Many other studies consider time-varying investment opportuni-
ties or non-normalities in returns, finding that optimal lifecycle allocation is affected by time-varying
expected returns, time-varying return variance, and skewness in returns.7 The studies in this literature
typically introduce parametric assumptions to model a particular aspect of the investment opportunity
set. Our block bootstrap approach preserves the empirically relevant features of investment opportu-
nities and non-normalities that affect the return distribution without requiring ex-ante specification of
which aspects matter most.
Although studies of time-varying investment opportunities provide important insights into opti-
mal intertemporal hedging demands, Cochrane’s (2014, 2022) alternative perspective for long-term
investors focuses on asset payoffs. Cochrane (2014) states, “the hedging demands emphasized by the
portfolio approach are really means to an end — an optimal consumption stream — rather than the end
itself.” Our approach focuses on the long-horizon asset payoffs that support a retirement consumption
stream, allowing the data to speak directly about the investment opportunities investors face over their
holding periods. We find that this more complete characterization of long-horizon outcomes enriches
our understanding of how households should optimally invest over the lifecycle.
2 The status quo in lifecycle investing
In seminal studies, Merton (1969) and Samuelson (1969) provide a baseline for lifecycle asset allo-
cation. They demonstrate that investors have constant optimal allocations to a risky asset and a risk-free
asset under the conditions that human capital is tradeable and investment opportunities are constant.
7See, e.g., Campbell and Viceira (1999); Barberis (2000); Lynch (2001); Wachter (2002); Campbell, Chan, and Viceira
(2003); Pástor and Stambaugh (2012); Michaelides and Zhang (2017, 2022); and Gomes, Michaelides, and Zhang (2022)
for evidence on time-varying expected returns; Lynch and Balduzzi (2000) and Chacko and Viceira (2005) for time-varying
variance; and Fagereng, Gottlieb, and Guiso (2017); Catherine (2022); Bonaparte, Korniotis, Kumar, Michaelides, and Zhang
(2024); and Shen (2024) for skewness.
6

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
Subsequent studies on investors’ lifecycle problem relax these assumptions.8
Human capital, as a dominant asset for many working-age investors, is the focus of much of the
literature on lifecycle portfolio choice. With complete markets, investors capitalize labor income and
optimal asset allocation is unaffected [Merton (1971)]. With incomplete markets (e.g., non-tradeable,
non-insurable labor income and borrowing constraints), in contrast, Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout
(2005) demonstrate that investors optimally choose age-based allocations. 9 If labor income risk is
idiosyncratic, human capital substitutes for the risk-free asset in the optimal portfolio and the young
hold more in stocks than the old. 10 Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992) consider endogenous labor
supply and retirement with utility over consumption and leisure, finding that labor supply flexibility
increases optimal financial portfolio risk. Because the young have more labor flexibility than the old,
the young should hold more in stocks. 11 Reinforcing these human capital effects, mean reversion in
stock returns also makes stocks more attractive for young investors with long horizons [e.g., Barberis
(2000), Wachter (2002), and Siegel (2014)].
Regulation stemming from the PPA favors an “investment fund product or model portfolio that
applies generally accepted investment theories [emphasis added ], is diversified so as to minimize the
risk of large losses and that is designed to provide varying degrees of long-term appreciation and cap-
ital preservation through a mix of equity and fixed income exposures based on the participant’s age,
target retirement date (such as normal retirement age under the plan) or life expectancy” [29 CFR §
2550.404c-5(e)(4)(i)]. TDFs meet these design criteria by following age-based, stock-bond asset allo-
cation policies. They adopt allocations with higher exposures to equities for younger investors and
increase exposures to fixed income assets as the investors age. Figure 2 illustrates this design with the
advertised unconditional glidepath weights in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills
from a TDF offered by a major investment firm.
TDFs have exploded in popularity since the passage of the PPA, with total assets under management
(AUM) reaching $3.5 trillion at year-end 2023 [Parker, Schoar, and Sun (2023) and Pacholok (2024)].
The growth reflects the aggressive trend of plan sponsors’ adoption of automatic enrollment features, the
8We refer readers to excellent reviews by Campbell (2006); Gomes (2020); and Gomes, Haliassos, and Ramadorai (2021).
9See also Heaton and Lucas (1997), Koo (1998), and Viceira (2001) for treatments of non-insurable labor income risk in
infinite-horizon models.
10Human capital can substitute for the risky asset with a systematic component in labor income [e.g., Viceira (2001);
Campbell and Viceira (2002); Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007); and Lynch and Tan (2011) ], such that the
optimal risky allocation decreases in the presence of labor income if the correlation between labor income shocks and stock
returns is sufficiently high.
11Farhi and Panageas (2007); Chai, Horneff, Maurer, and Mitchell (2011); and Hubener, Maurer, and Mitchell (2016),
among others, also study the implications for portfolio choice of flexible labor supply and endogenous retirement. Other
studies consider the effects of nonemployment on portfolio decisions [e.g., Bremus and Kuzin (2014); Fagereng, Guiso, and
Pistaferri (2018); and Bagliano, Fugazza, and Nicodano (2019)].
7

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
overwhelming tendency to select TDFs as default funds, and the propensity for participants to retain
the default elections [e.g., Madrian and Shea (2001) and Mitchell and Utkus (2022) ].12 Across all
participants in Vanguard plans, for example, 83% use TDFs and 58% hold their entire account balance
in a single TDF [Vanguard (2024)]. In short, TDFs now represent the status quo for retirement saving.
3 Data
In this section, we describe the data on asset class returns used in our analyses. We take the per-
spective of a US couple saving for retirement. Given the paucity of statistical evidence on long-horizon
asset class returns in the US data, we model forward-looking returns by examining the history of asset
class returns from a broad cross section of developed economies. We follow Anarkulova, Cederburg,
and O’Doherty (2022) in classifying countries as developed. The dataset includes monthly real returns
for domestic stocks, international stocks, government bonds, and government bills for 39 developed
countries. The data cover the period from 1890 to 2023, but the sample periods for individual coun-
tries vary based on data availability and the timing of economic development (i.e., a given country is
included in the sample only for the period after it achieves developed status).
The starting point for constructing the dataset is the GFDatabase from Global Financial Data. For
each sample country , the GFDatabase contains times series of total return indexes, price indexes, dividend-
price ratios, and total market capitalization for stocks; yields for ten-year government bonds and short-
term bills; consumer price indexes; and exchange rates. The internet appendix provides detailed
descriptions of the appropriate GFD data series for each country , alternative sources used to fill gaps in
the GFDatabase, calculations of asset class returns, adjustments to these calculations for several periods
surrounding major market disruptions (e.g., the closure of the New York Stock Exchange in 1914 at the
onset of World War I and the Greek government bond default in 2012), and dataset validation.
The dataset is a balanced panel in the sense that each country-month has non-missing returns for
domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills. The nominal returns for domestic stocks, bonds,
and bills for a given country are measured in the local currency; the nominal returns are then converted
to real returns using the local inflation rate. The nominal international stock returns for a given country
12As a default option, TDFs benefit investors who are inattentive, have behavioral biases, or lack financial literacy by offering
diversification benefits and automatic reallocations. A large literature shows suboptimal investment decisions related to inter-
national diversification [Bekaert, Hoyem, Hu, and Ravina (2017)], asset allocation [Benartzi and Thaler (2001)], contribution
levels [Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2011) and Goda, Levy , Manchester, Sojourner, and Tasoff (2020)], stock market partic-
ipation [van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011) ], and account concentration in employer stock [Poterba (2003)]. Campbell
(2016); Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2018); and Gomes, Haliassos, and Ramadorai (2021) provide comprehensive
reviews of this evidence.
8

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
are market-capitalization-weighted averages of the nominal returns for all non-domestic stock markets,
with appropriate adjustments for changes in exchange rates. Analogous to the calculations for the other
asset classes, the nominal international stock returns are converted to real returns based on local infla-
tion.13 As such, all asset class returns for a given country-month reflect the real investment outcomes
of local investors in that month.
The broad sample of asset class returns allows for a more comprehensive characterization of poten-
tial investment outcomes relative to samples based on single countries (e.g., the US or the UK). Although
single-country samples are commonly used to calibrate inputs for investment simulations, such samples
contain few independent observations of long-horizon investment outcomes. Moreover, these samples
suffer from both survivor bias [e.g., Brown, Goetzmann, and Ross (1995) ] and easy data bias [e.g.,
Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton (2002) ]. These biases can contribute to long historical periods over
which realized performance exceeds ex ante expectations[e.g., Fama and French (2002) and Avdis and
Wachter (2017)].14
In Table II, we list each sample country and the corresponding data coverage. Five countries —
Denmark, France, Germany , the UK, and the US — are included in the sample over the full 1890 to
2023 period. The sample periods for the other countries are shorter owing to data availability and
development classification status. Our data cover 91% of the potential country-months in the developed
country sample. Table II also presents the geometric average real return and the standard deviation of
real return for each combination of country and asset class. For the pooled sample of all 31,801 country-
month observations, the geometric average return is 0.37% for domestic stocks, 0.44% for international
stocks, 0.04% for bonds, and −0.03% for bills (untabulated). Based on comparisons with the pooled
sample, the average real returns in the US sample are higher for domestic stocks, bonds, and bills and
lower for international stocks. But the US is not an extreme outlier relative to other countries for any
of the four asset classes.15
13Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2025) show that the value-weighted average of foreign stock market real returns
and changes in real exchange rates each contribute about half of the overall volatility of the monthly international stock returns
in our dataset.
14The dataset construction methods are designed to mitigate survivor bias and easy data bias. The sample inclusion dates
for individual countries are based on ex ante measures of economic activity (e.g., the proportion of a country’s labor force
employed in the manufacturing and services sectors and the country’s membership in global policy organizations like the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), and we take significant steps to construct continuous monthly
data series for each country .
15The standard deviation of bond returns for Germany is extreme relative to the estimates for other sample countries. This
volatility is attributable to the well-known period of hyperinflation in Germany in the 1920s. Excluding all German data from
our model does not change the optimal fixed-weight asset allocation policy described in Section 5.1.
9

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
4 Methods
In this section, we detail our lifecycle assumptions, present the household’s portfolio choice prob-
lem, and discuss our approaches for modeling uncertainty over labor income, investment returns, and
longevity . Section 4.1 describes the lifecycle design. Section 4.2 defines and parameterizes household
utility over retirement consumption and bequest and introduces our base case static optimization prob-
lem. Section 4.3 presents the stochastic process for labor income during the working period and the
design of Social Security income during the retirement period. Section 4.4 describes the Monte Carlo
simulation procedure.
4.1 Lifecycle design
Households in our base specification are composed of a female ( f ) and a male ( m) of equal age.
The model periods are in months indexed by t = 1, 2, . . . ,Tmax, where Tmax is the month of death of
the last remaining survivor from the couple. Each member of the household is eligible to work and
save starting from the first month of age 25 ( t = 1). The retirement date is denoted Tret, and our base
case specifies an exogenous retirement age of 65, such that Tret = 480. An individual may experience
nonemployment during their potential working years, such that not all investors work the full 40 years.
In the base case, we assume that individuals save rc = 10% of their labor income for retirement, and
no contributions occur during nonemployment periods. The assumed 10% contribution rate is close
to the mean (11.7%) and median (11.0%) contribution rates for participants in Vanguard defined-
contribution plans in 2023, including both employee and employer contributions[Vanguard (2024)].16
We also assume that individuals earning less thanYmin = $15,000 (in 2022 USD) in a given year forego
contributing to their retirement plan, consistent with evidence of low retirement saving rates among
this group [e.g., Vanguard (2024)].
At time Tret+1, each individual leaves the workforce (ending either employment or nonemployment)
and begins to draw from retirement savings and Social Security . We assume that investors withdraw
rw = 4% of their account balance at retirement in the first year and inflation-adjusted amounts calcu-
lated from this base withdrawal in subsequent years [i.e., the “4% rule” of Bengen (1994)]. In reality ,
retirees use a variety of withdrawal strategies. The 4% rule is ubiquitous in popular press and common
retirement advice, so we use it as a simple heuristic for retirement withdrawals.17 We also demonstrate
16Our assumed 10% contribution rate is also similar to Poterba, Rauh, Venti, and Wise’s (2005, 2009) assumed 9% contri-
bution rate to household retirement accounts.
17In Choi’s (2022) review of the most popular personal finance books, he finds that seven of the 12 books offering explicit
10

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
that our main conclusions hold for alternative retirement withdrawal rules. We note that the outcomes
of households who choose to annuitize fully at retirement will be reflected by our wealth at retirement
results.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) reports conditional death probabilities at each age for
females and males. 18 Our simulations incorporate gender-specific longevity risk, and the lifespan of
each individual is randomly determined. Both the female and the male in each couple are alive at
age 25, but one or both may die before retirement at age 65. There is considerable uncertainty over
longevity outcomes. The 5th percentile of age at death for the couple (i.e., the last survivor) is 70.8
years, and the 95th percentile is 100.0 years. This uncertainty is an important feature to consider in
assessing the ability of investment strategies to fund consumption through retirement (see the internet
appendix for further details on the distribution of age at death).
Given the simulation design, the (unmodeled) consumption and potential survivor benefits from
Social Security during the pre-retirement period are independent of the retirement investment strategy .
As such, we do not study consumption in the pre-retirement period and do not include it in the utility
calculations.
4.2 Household utility and portfolio choice problem
Household utility is determined by monthly retirement consumption and a bequest:
U(C, B) =
TmaxX
t=Tret+1
δt
 
Ct /
p
Ht
1−γ
1 − γ + δTmax θ (B + k)1−γ
1 − γ , (1)
where Ct is real consumption in month t, Ht is the household’s size, B is the real bequest, δ is the
subjective discount factor,θ and k are bequest utility parameters, and γ is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion. Following Duarte, Fonseca, Goodman, and Parker (2024), we scale household consumption by
the square root of household size to reflect differences in consumption needs for couples versus singles
and set δ = 1 to equally weight the flow of utility during the retirement period. Our bequest utility
specification follows De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010). We use their estimate for risk aversion of
γ = 3.84, and we assume that this risk aversion coefficient applies to both consumption and bequest.
De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010) estimate a bequest intensity of θ = 2,360 when studying bequest
utility alongside utility from annual consumption, and we multiply this parameter estimate by 12 γ to
retirement spending advice recommend the 4% rule.
18See https://www.ssa.gov/oact/HistEst/PerLifeTables/2022/PerLifeTables2022.html.
11

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
reflect the mechanical difference in scaling between monthly and annual consumption levels. Finally ,
we inflation-adjust their bequest curvature parameterk, which determines the extent to which bequests
are viewed as luxury goods, and use k = $490,000 in 2022 USD.19
In our base specification, the household chooses a static asset allocation across domestic stocks,
international stocks, bonds, and bills to maximize expected utility:
max
{w}
E0[U(C, B)] = E0


TmaxX
t=Tret+1
 
Ct /
p
Ht
1−γ
1 − γ + θ (B + k)1−γ
1 − γ

 , (2)
s.t. Rp
t = w′Rt, (3)
1′w = 1, (4)
w ≥ 0, (5)
W0 = 0, (6)
Wt+1 =



Wt (1 + Rp
t+1) + St+1 for t ≤ Tret,
(Wt − Dt+1)(1 + Rp
t+1) for t > Tret,
(7)
Dt+1 =



0 for t ≤ Tret,
min{ 1
12 (rwWTret), Wt } for t > Tret,
(8)
Ct+1 = max{Dt+1 + SS t+1, SS It+1} for t > Tret, (9)
B = WTmax, (10)
where w is a 4 × 1 vector of fixed portfolio weights, Rt is a 4 × 1 vector of gross real returns on the
four assets in month t, Rp
t is the gross portfolio return, 1 is a 4 × 1 vector of ones, Wt is the household’s
end-of-month retirement wealth, St is the monthly flow of savings for the couple, Dt is the monthly
retirement account withdrawal, SS t is the couple’s monthly combined Social Security benefit, andSS It
is their monthly Supplemental Security Income. Equations (4) and (5) represent the constraints faced
by the couple on taking levered positions and short positions in risky assets. In subsequent analyses, we
relax the restriction on portfolio leverage.
19We do not consider utility from housing, which is an important asset for many households. Venti and Wise (1991) and
Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2011) show that few households use reverse mortgages or otherwise decrease their home equity
late in life.
12

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
4.3 Lifecycle income
We model labor income using the model of Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021). Their flexi-
ble framework allows for investor heterogeneity , permanent and transitory income shocks, and employ-
ment and nonemployment states. They estimate the model to fit a large number of cross-sectional
moments and time-series properties of lifecycle earnings data on millions of US workers from the SSA.
The annual income level for investor i (i ∈ { f , m}) at age τ + 24 (for τ = 1, 2, . . . , 40) is given by
Y i
τ = (1 − νi
τ)e(g(τ)+αi +β i f (τ)+zi
τ+ϵi
τ), (11)
where g(τ) is a quadratic polynomial that fits the well-known hump shape of lifecycle earnings, f (τ)
is a linear function increasing in τ, αi and β i are investor-specific parameters that affect the expected
level and slope of earnings, zi
τ is a persistent earnings component following
zi
τ = ρzi
τ−1 + ηi
τ, (12)
and ϵi
τ is a transitory earnings shock. The persistent earnings component coefficientρ is estimated to be
0.96 for annual earnings, which implies a half-life of about 17 years. Both the permanent shocks ( ηi
τ)
and the transitory shocks (ϵi
τ) follow normal mixture distributions. Finally ,νi
τ = 0 represents full-year
employment, whereas νi
τ = 1 is full-year nonemployment. This nonemployment variable takes values
as follows,
νi
τ =



0 with prob. 1 − pν(τ, zi
τ),
min{1, φτ} with prob. pν(τ, zi
τ),
(13)
where φτ follows an exponential distribution with mean 1/λ, pν(τ, zi
τ) = eξiτ
1+eξiτ
is the nonemployment
probability , andξi
τ = a + b f (τ) + cz i
τ + dz i
τ f (τ) with b < 0, c < 0, and d < 0. As such, the probability
of nonemployment is negatively influenced by the level of the persistent earnings component. This
modeling feature generates persistence in the nonemployment state.
We assume annual income is divided evenly over months in the year. For months 12 (τ − 1) < t ≤
12τ, savings is given by
Si
t =



1
12 (rc Y i
τ) for Y i
τ ≥ Ymin,
0 for Y i
τ < Ymin,
(14)
and
St = S f
t + Sm
t . (15)
13

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
The heterogeneity in earnings processes across investors is captured by two income parameters, αi
and β i, and the initial state of the permanent income component, zi
0. High (low) values for αi and
β i designate investor types with high (low) levels and growth rates, respectively , for expected lifetime
earnings, whereas high (low) zi
0 captures a tendency for high (low) early-career earnings. In our base
case analyses, we set all three parameters for both members of the couple equal to their median values
in the Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021) calibration, i.e., (αi, β i, zi
0) = (0, 0, 0).
We simulate from the labor income model using the parameter estimates from the replication code
of Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021) with the additional assumption that the income model
applies equally to females and males. We scale the simulation output (which initially has no standard
unit of measurement) to match the level of average log earnings in 2010 USD[Figure C.36 in Guvenen,
Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021) ] and then convert to 2022 USD by adjusting for the change in the
consumer price index (CPI). Figure 3 plots the distribution of household income from our base case
simulation as a function of household age. The mean reflects the well-known hump shape in earnings
[e.g., Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) ], and the 10th and 90th percentiles imply considerable
uncertainty in earnings.
Our simulations incorporate retirement income from Social Security benefits and the additional
social safety net from Supplemental Security Income (SSI). Social Security benefits are calculated based
on taxes paid on earnings during the working years. We use the formulas effective in 2022 to calculate
Social Security benefits based on each worker’s earnings. We incorporate spousal and survivor benefits
in the retirement period. In the internet appendix, we provide full details of the Social Security benefit
calculations. Finally , SSI is available to retirees with little other income. The maximum monthly benefit
in 2022 is $1,261 for couples and $841 for singles.
4.4 Simulation procedure
We simulate lifecycle outcomes for couples using a Monte Carlo approach. We solve for the optimal
static investment policy by maximizing expected household utility following equations (2) to (10). We
initially find the base case optimal strategy by considering all possible strategies that allocate across
domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills with fixed weights throughout the lifecycle. We
consider a grid with 1% increments for each weight to perform a grid search for the optimal strategy . We
then compare simulation results for the optimal fixed-weight strategy and several benchmark strategies.
Each investment strategy is adopted by otherwise identical couples (i.e., across simulations, the
couples in each draw have the same longevity , income, and savings and realize the same asset class
14

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
returns). As such, our simulation design draws inferences about the differences in expected utility and
retirement outcomes that derive from the chosen investing strategy .
Our simulation design includes the following steps in each draw:
1. We determine the lifespan of the household. We generate random longevity using conditional
mortality probabilities, and we assume that the probability of death is equal across the 12 months
at a given age. In the base case, we denote the realized lifespans in months (starting from age
25) of the female and the male as Tf and Tm and the couple’s lifespan asTmax = max{Tf , Tm}.
2. We adopt a stationary block bootstrap approach in the spirit of Politis and Romano (1994) to draw
a time series of monthly real returns for the four asset classes that covers the couple’s lifespan.
We randomly select a starting country-month observation in the full sample and draw a block of
consecutive monthly returns from the same country to capture time-series dependencies in asset
returns. The block length is drawn from a geometric distribution. The average block length is 120
months in the base case, so the blocks reflect long-term time-series properties of returns. A set of
all four asset class returns is drawn from each selected country-month to preserve cross-sectional
dependencies across assets, and we denote a monthly real return vector as
Rt = [RDomestic stocks
t RInternational stocks
t RBonds
t RBills
t ]′. (16)
In the event that the asset return data from a country-period is insufficient to fill a return block
(i.e., the end of the sample for that country occurs before the number of monthly return vectors
in the block equals the drawn block length), we draw a random country and continue to fill the
return block with return data from the beginning of that country’s sample (i.e., we use a stationary
block bootstrap approach to avoid undersampling). We repeatedly draw blocks of returns from
random countries and periods until we produce a time series of asset class returns that spans the
viable investment period for the couple. This period extends from month t = 2 (i.e., the second
month of age 25 and the first month in which the couple may have a positive beginning-of-month
account balance) to montht = Tmax. The final bootstrap draw of asset class returns in the iteration
is R = {R2, R3, . . . ,RTmax }.
3. Given the couple’s chosen investment strategy , we compute a monthly time series of portfolio
returns over the couple’s lifetime. Denote the investment weights for the chosen strategy in month
t as wt, where wt = w for a fixed-weight strategy . The portfolio return in montht is Rp
t = w′
t Rt.
15

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
4. The couple begins with no wealth in savings, W0 = 0. We calculate the evolution of wealth
during the working years, considering savings from labor income and returns on invested wealth
as previously described.
5. At retirement, the couple stops working and saving. We calculate the evolution of wealth dur-
ing the retirement years, considering withdrawals and returns on invested wealth as previously
described. If the household’s wealth is depleted at any time during retirement, it remains at zero
until death. The household also receives monthly Social Security benefits. The couple is supported
by SSI if their income falls below the threshold. The couple’s bequest is all remaining wealth at
the death of the last surviving spouse.
We repeat this procedure 1,000,000 times for each investment strategy . We use the time series of
monthly consumption during retirement and the household’s bequest to compute utility for each draw
following equation (1). The mean utility across draws is our Monte Carlo estimate of expected utility
for a given investment strategy . For each strategy , we also compile distributional statistics for wealth
at retirement, the portfolio drawdown during the household’s working period, the income replacement
rate during retirement, the portfolio drawdown during the household’s retirement period, and wealth
at death (i.e., the bequest).20
We make utility comparisons across strategies by running simulations as described above but with a
range of potential savings rates to compute an equivalent savings rate. Given the retirement utility from
a current investment strategy (e.g., the optimal fixed-weight allocation) with the 10% base savings rate
during the working years, we find the savings rate associated with an alternative investment strategy
that provides the same expected retirement utility .
5 Results
In this section, we examine optimal portfolio choice in our lifecycle model. Section 5.1 presents the
optimal fixed-weight strategy and the utility gains relative to four benchmark strategies. Section 5.2
details strategy performance in the pre-retirement and post-retirement periods. Section 5.3 considers
dynamic elements of asset allocation. Section 5.4 discusses results for a wide variety of alterations to
our base fixed-weight specification. Section 5.5 considers the effect of investor beliefs regarding past
20Maximum portfolio drawdowns are calculated as the largest real negative cumulative return relative to the previous peak.
The working-period drawdown occurs entirely within the working years. The retirement-period drawdown begins with a peak
that could occur during either the working years or the retirement years. That is, falling asset prices in the late working years
can contribute to our measured retirement drawdown.
16

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
versus future US market performance. Section 5.6 further examines the importance of our bootstrap
sampling approach and the specification of the investment opportunity set.
5.1 Optimal investment strategy
Panel A of Table III shows the optimal fixed-weight strategy that maximizes expected retirement util-
ity . The couple optimally invests 33% in domestic stocks, 67% in international stocks, 0% in bonds, and
0% in bills throughout their lifetimes. At this optimum, the couple eschews fixed income investments
and chooses an all-equity strategy . This result may seem surprising given the vaunted diversification
benefits and safety offered by bonds. As discussed in the context of Table I, however, bonds become
riskier and more correlated with domestic stocks as the investment horizon grows. The optimal alloca-
tion reflects the superior diversification benefits and growth potential of international stocks.
Panel B of Table III shows asset weights for four benchmark strategies and provides an analysis of
the economic differences compared with the optimal strategy . The benchmark strategies are a 100%
allocation to bills, a 100% allocation to domestic stocks, a balanced strategy with a 60% allocation to
domestic stocks and a 40% allocation to bonds, and the TDF shown in Figure 2. The bills strategy
was a common default in the pre-PPA era, and the balanced and TDF strategies are QDIAs under the
PPA. The table reports the savings rates that provide households with the same expected utility over
retirement consumption and bequest as a 10.0% savings rate in the optimal, all-equity strategy . The
bills, domestic stocks, and balanced portfolios follow fixed-weight strategies, such that the optimal
fixed-weight strategy provides higher expected utility by construction. The equivalent savings rates
reveal the economic magnitudes of utility differences. To achieve the same degree of wellbeing, the
couple must save 56.2% (Bills), 16.3% (Domestic Stocks), or 19.3% (Balanced) of its annual income
during the working years.
Based on the conventional wisdom, we might expect the TDF to improve expected utility relative to
the optimal fixed-weight strategy . The TDF specifies age-based weights, and relaxing our focus on fixed-
weight strategies introduces the potential for utility gains. Further, TDF glidepaths are designed within
lifecycle models that consider investors’ long-term goals and risk preferences.21 We find, however, that
a couple must save 16.1% (i.e., 61% more) with the TDF to achieve the same expected utility as with the
optimal fixed-weight strategy . Overall, Table III implies that a household currently heeding conventional
advice achieves an economically large increase in utility by reallocating to an internationally diversified,
21See, e.g., https://corporate.vanguard.com/content/dam/corp/research/pdf/Vanguards-Life-Cycle-
Investing-Model-VLCM-A-general-portfolio-framework-US-ISGVLCM_032021_online.pdf .
17

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
all-equity strategy .22
Figure 4 explores deviations from the optimal strategy and the associated equivalent savings rates.
Panel A varies the allocation to domestic stocks between 0% and 100% within an all-equity design
(i.e., the weights in bonds and bills are 0% and the remainder of the portfolio not invested in domestic
stocks is allocated to international stocks). Expected utility as a function of the allocation to domestic
stocks is relatively flat, and all allocations ranging from 11% domestic and 89% international to 55%
domestic and 45% international have equivalent savings rates below 10.5%. This finding gives real-
world investors considerable latitude to choose an all-equity strategy . For example, a US investor may
feel comfortable investing over half of their wealth in the domestic market given the US’s large global
weight. Our results indicate that, as long as investors avoid overly large domestic equity allocations,
the utility costs are small if they deviate from the optimum but maintain an all-equity approach.
Figure 4 also presents analogous results for adding bonds (Panel B) or bills (Panel C). In these
analyses, the weight in bonds or bills ranges from 0% to 40% and the equity portion of the portfolio
is split with relative weights of 33% in domestic stocks and 67% in international stocks. Our investors
dislike even relatively small allocations to bonds. An allocation of 12% to bonds produces an 11.0%
equivalent savings rate, which implies that the couples feel they need to increase their savings rate by
10% if they allocate 12% of their wealth to bonds. To achieve the same expected utility as saving 10.0%
with the all-equity strategy , the couples must save 20% more to invest 20% in bonds, 35% more to invest
30%, and 54% more to invest 40%. The equivalent savings rates are even higher for allocations to bills
in Panel C.
5.2 Lifecycle investment strategy performance
The previous section shows that the optimal fixed-weight strategy is an all-equity allocation with
international diversification. In this section, we examine simulation results for couples who adopt the
optimal investment strategy or one of the alternatives. For each strategy , we study four retirement saving
outcomes: (i) the distribution of wealth at retirement, (ii) the distribution of the income replacement
rate to describe the consumption stream in retirement, (iii) the probability of exhausting financial wealth
prior to death, and (iv) the distribution of wealth at death. We also consider two intermediate outcomes:
22The magnitude of the estimated welfare gains depends on household risk aversion, but our conclusion that the all-equity
strategy provides economically large gains holds for all γ values between zero and ten. As is tradition in the literature [e.g.,
Campbell, Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2001)], we take a partial equilibrium view of lifecycle investing and do not consider
equilibrium effects of investor shifts across investment strategies. As Heaton and Lucas (2000) state, “Although one could look
at portfolio choice in a general equilibrium framework, unless the model were capable of generating a realistic returns process
the results on portfolio choice would also be suspect.”
18

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
(i) the distribution of the maximum drawdown during the working years and (ii) the distribution of the
maximum drawdown during the retirement years.
5.2.1 Pre-retirement period
Panel A of Table IV summarizes the distributions of retirement wealth. For each strategy , the table
shows the mean, standard deviation, and percentiles of the wealth distribution at the beginning of the
retirement period across 1,000,000 bootstrap simulations. Panel A of Figure 5 provides a visual summary
of the five strategies using box-and-whiskers plots. The middle line is the median, the box designates
the interquartile range, and the whiskers extend to the 10th and 90th percentiles. The exhibits report
wealth at retirement in millions of 2022 USD.
For context in interpreting the wealth levels, couples save $0.24 million on average. As reported in
Table C.I, about 2.3% of households have both members die prior to retirement age. For these couples,
bequests occur prior to retirement and wealth at retirement is $0.
The optimal strategy outperforms the alternatives in generating wealth at retirement. Bills perform
poorly in wealth accumulation, with an average retirement wealth balance of only $0.27 million. The
poor performance demonstrates that money market and stable value funds are ineffective retirement
saving tools when used in isolation and provides support for the changes to default DC plan options
brought about by the PPA. Investing in domestic stocks produces $1.02 million in wealth on average
(annual withdrawal of $40,800 given our 4% retirement withdrawal rule), which is higher than the
averages for the two QDIAs of $0.71 million for the balanced portfolio (withdrawal of $28,400) and
$0.77 million for the TDF (withdrawal of $30,700). The optimal, all-equity strategy generates the most
wealth on average at $1.07 million, which supports an annual real withdrawal of $42,600.
More important, the percentiles in Panel A of Table IV show that the distribution of wealth for the
optimal strategy is preferable to the distributions for all other strategies. Concentrating on the poor
outcomes, the optimal strategy has a 5th percentile of $0.13 million versus $0.03 million for bills, $0.07
million for domestic stocks, $0.06 million for the balanced strategy , and $0.09 million for the TDF . The
optimal strategy provides households with impressive upside, and its international diversification limits
downside risk during the saving years.
5.2.2 Retirement period and bequest
Panel B of Table IV and Panel B of Figure 5 summarize the distribution of the income replacement
rate during retirement for each strategy . The reported replacement rates are calculated as the mean of
19

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
monthly household retirement consumption divided by the mean of monthly household income during
the working ages of 25 to 65.23 The table reports that the two QDIA strategies (along with Social Security
benefits) allow couples to achieve full income replacement, on average. The mean replacement rate is
1.03 for the TDF , for example, although 62% of couples have a replacement rate below one. The optimal
strategy performs best by generating a mean replacement rate of 1.24, and more than half (55%) of
couples achieve full replacement or better. The left-tail outcomes for the optimal portfolio also exceed
those for the QDIA strategies.
Preserving wealth in retirement is crucial, and retirees who exhaust their savings must rely solely
on their Social Security and SSI benefits. Panel C of Figure 5 plots the probability of financial ruin,
defined as reaching $0 in wealth prior to the death of the last survivor in the household. Couples
investing in “safe” bills and using the 4% rule have a 38.9% chance of running out of savings. Fully
investing in domestic stocks is better with a 17.1% ruin probability , but this risk is likely higher than
most households would like to face. The two QDIAs, which invest in fixed income to preserve wealth,
also fail to generate reliable streams of retirement income. The balanced strategy has a ruin probability
of 16.9%, and the status quo TDF has an even higher probability of 19.7%. Recall from Figure 2 that the
TDF invests just 17% in equity throughout much of retirement. The large allocations to bonds and bills
do little to prevent poor retirement outcomes. The ruin probability for the optimal strategy is low in
comparison at 7.0%. Equity offers strong potential for additional investment gains during retirement,
and international diversification is crucial for capital preservation.
Panel C of Table IV and Panel D of Figure 5 display distributional statistics for real wealth upon
the death of the last survivor in the household. A couples’s bequest is $0 if they experience financial
ruin prior to death. The optimal strategy substantially outperforms the other strategies in providing
bequests. The mean wealth at death is $2.94 million for the optimal strategy versus $0.08 million for
bills, $2.61 million for domestic stocks, $1.10 million for the balanced strategy , and $0.72 million for
the TDF . The means are heavily affected by right-tail outcomes. The median couple generates a bequest
of $1.03 million with the optimal strategy , which is far larger than for bills ($0.02 million), domestic
stocks ($0.59 million), the balanced strategy ($0.35 million), or the TDF ($0.27 million). The large
bequests for the optimal strategy reflect both the tendency for stocks to help in building wealth and the
relative safety of the optimal strategy in preserving wealth during retirement.24
23The replacement rate is equal to 0.00 for couples who are deceased prior to retirement.
24In the appendix, we further study household retirement outcomes. We show that the favorable performance of the all-
equity strategy relative to the benchmarks in achieving retirement outcomes (i) is partially attributable to continued wealth
generation in retirement to combat longevity risk, (ii) persists even if the domestic stock market has a poor realization during
retirement, (iii) is strongest if realized inflation in retirement is high, and (iv) occurs even if the realized correlation between
20

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
5.2.3 Portfolio drawdowns
The focus on the four retirement outcomes summarized in Panels A to D of Figure 5 glosses over
important intermediate portfolio performance measures. Regulations focus on short-term losses as a
metric for the suitability of retirement strategies. To study this issue, Table V and Panels E and F of
Figure 5 report the largest portfolio drawdowns during the working years and retirement years for each
strategy . The reported drawdowns are the largest peak-to-trough declines in real asset values for a given
strategy , and they are expressed in decimal form in the table.
During the working years, each strategy produces large real drawdowns on average. Panel A of
Table V shows average maximal drawdowns of 42% for bills, 67% for domestic stocks, 54% for the
balanced strategy , 52% for the TDF , and 55% for the optimal strategy . The optimal strategy’s 55%
average drawdown would cause discomfort for even the most stalwart investors, but each strategy
that attempts to provide long-term appreciation is subject to similarly large average losses. Investors,
advisors, and regulators are likely most concerned about the largest potential drawdowns, and the
optimal strategy outperforms the alternatives in the right tail of the drawdown distribution. The 95th
percentile drawdown of 76% for the optimal strategy is favorable relative to drawdowns of 96% (bills),
96% (domestic stocks), 92% (balanced), and 81% (TDF).
Retirement-period drawdowns are likely an even larger concern for households. Panel B of Table V
reports average maximal drawdowns during retirement of 46% for bills, 62% for domestic stocks, 50%
for the balanced portfolio, 40% for the TDF , and 48% for the optimal strategy . According to this metric,
the TDF achieves better capital preservation compared with the optimal portfolio. Based on avoiding
the largest drawdowns, however, the optimal strategy is the best. The 95th percentile for the optimal
portfolio is a 74% drawdown versus an 89% drawdown for the TDF .
We note that the superior performance of the optimal strategy in the four outcomes (generating
wealth at retirement, producing retirement income, avoiding financial ruin, and providing a bequest)
occurs despite the potential for relatively large intermediate drawdowns. Experiencing large drawdowns
is painful for investors, and many investors will have a natural inclination to abandon their strategies at
inopportune times when drawdowns occur. An important policy issue is how to manage this behavior,
as the optimal strategy relies on maintaining the all-equity approach through good times and bad. An
additional policy issue is the extent to which the average drawdown is emphasized relative to the worst
potential drawdowns. The TDF provides lower average and median retirement drawdowns than the
all-equity approach, but it has poor worst-case scenarios when high inflation erodes the real value of
domestic and international stock markets is high.
21

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
bonds in retirement.
5.3 Static versus dynamic optimization
Our lifecycle simulation design restricts investors to perform static optimization. The base case has a
constant savings percentage, a fixed retirement date, and fixed-weight investment strategies. Dynamic
optimization is common in the lifecycle asset allocation literature, and past studies allow investors to
choose optimal savings rates and retirement ages. Many studies allow for age-dependent asset alloca-
tions, and some incorporate asset market state variables to allow for state-dependent strategies.
We acknowledge that dynamic optimization can be important for portfolio choice. The commonly
used numerical methods for dynamic optimization, however, require a small number of state variables.
Studies with dynamic optimization often make simplifying assumptions that asset returns are indepen-
dent and identically distributed (IID) and normally distributed or that expected stock returns are linear
functions of state variables. We strongly believe that it is crucial to preserve the time-series and cross-
sectional dependencies of asset class returns when evaluating lifecycle strategies. Given the complexities
of the patterns in the data, it is not possible to describe adequately the current market state using a small
number of state variables. We prioritize our bootstrap approach and adopt a static optimization problem
as our base case.
In this section, we consider feasible alterations to our base case to gain a sense of the importance of
dynamic optimization in our setting. We retain our careful treatment of the asset class return data. We
consider age- and income-based savings rates, optimal retirement dates, and strategies that condition on
age or the domestic stock market price-dividend ratio. Overall, we find little evidence that full dynamic
optimization, if it were possible to implement, would change our conclusion that an all-equity strategy
is optimal (or close to it).
5.3.1 Time-varying investment allocations conditional on household age
The optimal fixed-weight strategy of 33% in domestic stocks and 67% in international stocks out-
performs the age-based, stock-bond strategy employed by a representative TDF . There may be, however,
an alternative strategy with age-based weights that improves upon our base case. In this section, we
investigate households who condition their investment strategy on their age.
We allow households to choose different portfolio weights for each year of their life to maximize
expected retirement utility . The optimization requires an iterative approach since the optimal weights
at any given age depend on the weights chosen for all other ages. In each iteration, we optimize the
22

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
weights at each age conditional on the previous iteration’s optimal weights for all other ages. We iterate
until both the weight changes across successive iterations become consistently small and the economic
differences become negligible. To mitigate the effects of simulation error on the estimated optimal
weights, we group ages 25-29 (when household savings are minimal) and ages 90 and above (when the
sample of surviving households is small). This iterative optimization technique is too computationally
intensive to use as the base case.
Figure 6 presents the optimal age-based portfolio weights from ages 25 to 95. The results are
remarkably similar to our optimal fixed-weight strategy of 33% domestic stocks and 67% international
stocks. A household with longevity of 95 years, for example, allocates 99% to equity on average, with
an average split of 31% domestic stocks and 69% international stocks. We observe a slight tendency
toward higher domestic allocations during working years relative to retirement years.
Notably , the optimal strategy maintains minimal fixed income exposure. The couple remains fully
invested in stocks except for a brief period early in retirement. At age 65, the optimal allocation shifts
to 26% domestic stocks, 47% international stocks, 0% bonds, and 27% bills. By age 68, however, the
equity allocation again exceeds 90%. The modest allocation to bills early in retirement is our investors’
response to the sequence-of-returns risk that is created by the 4% rule’s fixed real withdrawal amount,
but the effect is short-lived.25 The household never chooses to make a significant allocation to bonds.
We calculate the equivalent savings rate for the optimal age-based strategy in Figure 6. To achieve
the same expected retirement utility as a 10.0% savings rate with the optimal fixed-weight strategy ,
a couple with the age-based strategy must save more than 9.9%. This negligible economic difference
suggests that allowing for an age-based strategy provides little benefit beyond what can be achieved
with an appropriately chosen fixed-weight strategy .
5.3.2 Income- and age-based contribution rates
We also consider contribution rates that vary based on income and age. We use the realized con-
tribution rates estimated by Parker, Schoar, Cole, and Simester (2023) using account-level data on US
retirement savers. They divide savers into terciles based on income and examine investor contribution
rates by age groups (i.e., ages 25-27, ages 28-30, and so on). 26 We place each retirement saver in our
simulation into one of the income- and age-based groups based on the income cutoffs reported by Parker,
25In the internet appendix, we present a version of Figure 6 corresponding to a household making withdrawals in retirement
equal to 4% of current retirement wealth rather than 4% of wealth at the retirement date. Under this simulation design, the
household refrains from investing in fixed income at all ages.
26Fagereng, Holm, Moll, and Natvik (2021) show that the net contribution rate is relatively constant as a function of wealth,
so we concentrate on the age- and income-based savings rates in Parker, Schoar, Cole, and Simester (2023).
23

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
Schoar, Cole, and Simester (2023), such that each individual in our simulation has a time-varying con-
tribution rate that matches the behavior of US investors. This modification to our static design with a
constant savings rate does not affect the optimal strategy . The couple chooses an allocation of 33% in
domestic stocks, 67% in international stocks, 0% in bonds, and 0% in bills.
5.3.3 Optimal retirement timing
We next examine optimal retirement timing. We allow households to optimize across portfolio
choice and retirement age, with potential ages ranging from 62 to 70 (the earliest and latest ages to
claim Social Security). We assume that the couple claims Social Security upon retirement. The investors
optimize utility over a bequest and consumption from age 62 until death, and their consumption prior
to retirement (i.e., from age 62 through the chosen retirement age) is set to their earnings minus their
retirement contributions.
To find the optimal retirement ages, we first classify couples into terciles across each of three dimen-
sions as they are turning 62: (i) current earnings, (ii) current retirement wealth, and (iii) expected
Social Security benefit level. This procedure classifies each couple into one of 27 groups. We find the
optimal retirement age for each group. As detailed in the internet appendix, the optimal retirement ages
range from 62 to 70. The optimal age is increasing in current income, decreasing in current wealth,
and decreasing in Social Security benefits. We then find the optimal fixed-weight asset allocation strat-
egy , while allowing each couple to retire at their optimal age. Incorporating optimal retirement timing
produces an optimal asset allocation that is identical to the one from our base case.
5.3.4 Time-varying investment allocations conditional on the market state
We study whether the couples in our simulations prefer to adopt time-varying allocations that
depend on the market state. The price-dividend ratio of the domestic stock market is a prominent
state variable in the asset allocation literature, so we allow our investors to consider this variable. We
augment our dataset of asset class returns with a lagged price-dividend ratio for each country-month
before running the bootstrap. As such, entering each month, the couple is aware of the current valuation
level of domestic stocks. We divide the market states into quintiles, creating groups of country-months
that range from low price-dividend ratios (from 0.00 to 18.76) to high price-dividend ratios (from 43.67
to infinity). We allow the couples to choose a different asset allocation in each quintile, and we find the
jointly optimal set of state-dependent weights.
Table VI shows the optimal conditional allocations. Panel A repeats allocations for the base case,
24

--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
which does not condition on the market state. Panel B shows the optimal weights for each price-dividend
quintile. When the domestic price-dividend ratio is low, investors weight domestic stocks heavily at 65%
and allocate the remaining 35% to international stocks. In the middle three quintiles, the allocations
are similar to the unconditional optimal strategy . In the quintile with the highest price-dividend ratios,
the couples reduce the domestic stock allocation to 16%, increase international stock exposure to 75%,
and invest 9% in bonds. Thus, when domestic stock prices are very high, the couples optimally allocate
a small portion of their wealth to bonds.
To measure the economic gains from considering the market state relative to a fixed-weight strategy ,
we calculate the equivalent savings rate. To achieve the same expected utility as the couple saving
10.0% with the optimal fixed-weight strategy , a couple using the conditional strategy saves 9.7%. In
untabulated results, we find that nearly 80% of the economic gain from conditioning is attributable to
varying the domestic-international stock allocation rather than to including bonds.27
5.4 Lifecycle problem modifications
The all-equity strategy with 33% in domestic stocks and 67% in international stocks is optimal given
our lifecycle design described in Section 4. We now examine the sensitivity to a range of modifications
to the base case. Table VII presents the results, with the base case summarized in Panel A for conve-
nience. The remaining panels correspond to optimal static allocations under alternative designs. For
each specification, we report the optimal asset class weights. The last column of the table shows the
amount of borrowing as a percentage of wealth for the specifications in which leverage is allowed.
5.4.1 Lifecycle simulation design
Panels B through J of Table VII show that our results are insensitive to modifying several aspects of
the simulation design:
• the underlying sample of asset class returns restricted to the post-World War II period (i.e., October
1945 to December 2023),
• the underlying sample restricted to countries with relatively large populations (i.e., a given coun-
try’s data are included in the sample only for the period after the country’s population first reaches
0.5% of the world population),
27If we restrict investors from holding bonds and bills, the optimal conditional strategy invests 64%, 27%, 30%, 30%, and
22% in domestic stocks across the five states with the remainder in international stocks. The equivalent savings rate for this
strategy is 9.79% compared with 9.73% for the conditional strategy in Table VI.
25

--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
• the underlying sample restricted to countries with relatively developed equity markets (i.e., a
given country’s data are included in the sample only for the period after the country’s market
capitalization-to-GDP ratio first reaches 0.5),
• the underlying sample to exclude all United States data,
• the average block length in the stationary block bootstrap from 12 months to 240 months,
• the risk aversion parameter from γ = 0.5 to γ = 10.0,28
• the weight on bequest from θ = 0 (i.e., no bequest motive) to θ = ∞ (i.e., utility only from
bequest),
• the household utility specification to scale consumption by Ht (i.e., household size) instead of
p
Ht,
• the household utility specification to include a subjective discount factor that we set to δ =
0.981/12 (i.e., an annualized discount factor of 0.98),
• the withdrawal strategy to be a constant, real withdrawal rate of rw = 3% or rw = 5%,
• the withdrawal strategy to withdraw an annualized 4% of wealth at the beginning of each month,
• the retirement age to be 62, 67, or 70 (i.e., Tret to equal 444, 504, or 540),
• the contribution rate to be rc = 5% or rc = 15%,
• the lower income limit for retirement saving to be Ymin = $0 or Ymin = $45,000, and
• the household type to be a single female, a single male, a female couple, or a male couple.
None of these alterations has a material impact on the optimal strategy . The weights in bonds and bills
are 0% in every case, and the weight in domestic stocks varies between 27% and 45%.
28Calvet, Campbell, Gomes, and Sodini (2023) estimate risk aversion in the cross section of Swedish households. The risk
aversion parameter of 7.5 is close to their mean of 7.57, and their standard deviation of 1.06 implies that the parameters of
5.0 and 10.0 are roughly two standard deviations from the mean. Therefore, the large majority of households lie in this range
according to Calvet, Campbell, Gomes, and Sodini’s (2023) estimates.
26

--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
5.4.2 Investor types
Our base analysis studies households with median parameter values in the lifetime earnings model of
Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021). Panel K of Table VII studies four household types differing
along two dimensions: low or high human capital [(αi, β i)] and low or high initial income [zi
0]. These
parameter combinations produce a variety of lifetime earnings profiles (i.e., saving concentrated earlier
versus later in the working years) and total lifetime earnings levels. Despite the differences in savings
behavior across households and the relative importance of savings versus Social Security , the optimal
strategies are virtually identical. The results suggest a one-size-fits-all approach to lifetime savings.
5.4.3 Correlated labor income and stock returns
Panel L of Table VII explores the effect of correlation between the persistent earnings shock in Guve-
nen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song’s (2021) model and domestic stock returns. The earnings shocks are
annual, so we relate them to annual stock returns. We first generate a distribution of compounded
annual stock returns from our block bootstrap approach. We then use a Gaussian copula approach to
introduce correlation between the bootstrap distribution of annual stock returns and the normal mixture
distribution of the earnings shock. The base case has 0.0 correlation, and Panel L considers correlations
ranging from 0.1 to 0.5.29
Introducing positive correlation between income and domestic stock returns decreases the optimal
weight in domestic stocks. At a modest correlation of 0.1, the optimal strategy is 30% in domestic stocks
and 70% in international stocks. At a high correlation of 0.5, the weight in domestic stocks is down to
18% with the remaining 82% allocated to international stocks. None of the couples switches to bonds
when shifting their portfolios away from domestic stocks.30
5.4.4 Leverage
Our base case considers couples who are constrained from taking on leverage in their retirement
savings vehicles. This constraint is realistic for most investors and can affect the optimal portfolio
29The literature diverges on the magnitude of the correlation between income and stock returns. Fama and Schwert (1977)
and Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005), among others, find little relation. Davis and Willen (2000) and Campbell, Cocco,
Gomes, and Maenhout (2001) estimate heterogeneous correlations with respect to educational attainment, with highly edu-
cated individuals having correlations as high as 0.3 to 0.5. Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007) model cointegration
between dividends and labor income, and their model implies a correlation around 0.5 between stock returns and returns to
human capital throughout most of the working years. We consider a wide range of correlations that spans these estimates.
30We also study the extreme case of perfect correlation considered by Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992) and find that
the optimal allocation is 3% domestic stocks, 97% international stocks, 0% bonds, and 0% bills. This result is consistent with
the pattern in Panel L.
27

--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
allocation [e.g., Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)]. Asness (1996) argues, however, that investors should
use leverage to invest in a balanced portfolio with 60% domestic stocks and 40% bonds rather than
invest 100% in equities.31 We relax the constraint on leverage to study hypothetical investors who are
able to borrow in their retirement savings accounts.
We model leverage as follows. We assume that investors will pay the prevailing yield on local gov-
ernment bills plus a spread. We consider (i) a high spread of 6.50% that is estimated by Davis, Kubler,
and Willen (2006) from household borrowing costs and near the median broker margin rates as of April
2024, (ii) a medium spread of 1.40% that equals the lowest broker margin rate as of April 2024, and
(iii) a low spread of 0.37% estimated by van Binsbergen, Diamond, and Grotteria (2022) as an average
risk-free rate spread over government bills using derivative prices. Leverage makes it possible for a
couple’s wealth to fall below zero. If the couple is still working, we require the household to repay their
debts before they resume saving for retirement. If the couple is in their retirement years, we set their
wealth to zero. We consider borrowing levels between 0% and 100% of wealth in increments of 5%.
The 100% upper limit is in line with US regulations on margin for stocks.
The couples who have access to leverage optimize over both asset class weights and leverage levels.
Panel M of Table VII reports that a couple subject to the high borrowing spread does not wish to use
leverage. As such, the no-leverage constraint in our base case is not binding for this household. At the
medium spread, the couple optimally borrows 55% of their wealth. Rather than levering up a balanced
portfolio, as advocated by Asness (1996), the couple continues to choose an all-equity portfolio with
34% in domestic stocks and 66% in international stocks. These results show that households who pay
realistic margin rates optimally choose all-equity strategies.
Panel M of Table VII shows that bonds enter the optimal allocation with the lowest spread of 0.37%.
This borrowing spread from van Binsbergen, Diamond, and Grotteria (2022) reflects the risk-free rates
implicit in futures and other derivatives. Few households currently trade derivatives in their retirement
accounts. Leveraged strategies must be actively managed to maintain desired leverage, and leveraged
products are often seen as unsuitable for long-term investors as a result of performance drags from fre-
quent re-leveraging [e.g., Cheng and Madhavan (2009)]. To the extent that households invest through
institutions to achieve this low borrowing cost, management fees would add to the cost of using lever-
age.32 We study hypothetical investors who can access the risk-free borrowing rates without paying a
31We compare Asness’s (1996) preferred strategy of 60% domestic stocks, 40% bonds, and 55% borrowing with the optimal
100% equity strategy from our base case with no leverage. His strategy has an equivalent savings rate of 19.1%, indicating
that levering a balanced portfolio leads to a large utility loss relative to the optimal, all-equity strategy with no leverage.
32Expense ratios for leveraged ETFs vary . The largest leveraged ETF , ProShares UltraPro QQQ, currently charges an annual
expense ratio of 0.84%. The average leveraged ETF expense ratio is 1.04% (https://www.etf.com/topics/leveraged).
28

--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
management fee or transaction costs. With risk-free borrowing rates, optimal borrowing hits the cap
at 100% of wealth. The optimal portfolio allocations are 28% in domestic stocks, 57% in international
stocks, 15% in bonds, and 0% in bills. Thus, the couples remain heavily invested in stocks, but they
do have a small allocation to bonds. The worst monthly return to the portfolio is −48%, such that the
couple remains just solvent given our assumption of monthly rebalancing. In the internet appendix,
we demonstrate that the main conclusions from Panel M of Table VII hold for household risk aversion
coefficients between 0.5 and 10.0.
5.5 American exceptionalism
As described in Section 3, we model forward-looking returns using a broad set of developed coun-
tries. Some contend that the US stock market is “special,” however, such that restricting to the relatively
short sample of US data could be sensible for Americans. One view of American stock market excep-
tionalism is that high historical returns reflect investors’ past learning about US structural advantages,
and current investor beliefs manifest as high valuation ratios and lower future expected returns [e.g.,
van Binsbergen, Hua, Peeters, and Wachter (2025) ]. Reliance on the US sample requires a different
view — common among practitioners — that the US will continue to outperform foreign markets and
generate high future returns.33
We explore the role of American exceptionalism beliefs on optimal portfolio choice. We mix the
return distributions implied by the full developed country sample and the US sample with weights that
reflect an investor’s belief that the US has more favorable return characteristics. To implement this
approach, we run the simulation with (1 − x)% × 1,000,000 iterations using the developed sample and
x% × 1,000,000 using the US sample, where x% is an investor’s subjective probability that the US is
special. The optimal weights maximize expected utility conditional on the belief.
Our analysis reveals that optimal allocations are sensitive to beliefs. A couple with complete con-
viction in American exceptionalism prefers to invest 100% in US stocks. Even a small degree of doubt
introduces international diversification — a 90% exceptionalism belief corresponds to an optimal port-
folio of 96% US stocks and 4% international stocks. A 50% belief that future US returns will be special
(i.e., that prices do not yet reflect US structural advantages) leads to an optimal portfolio of 60% US
stocks and 40% international stocks, closely aligning with current global market weights. Thus, the com-
mon practice of overweighting US stocks[e.g., French and Poterba (1991)] requires strong conviction in
33See, for example, https://www.blackrock.com/us/financial-professionals/insights/reasons-to-remain-
overweight and https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2025-01-13/us-exceptionalism-doubting-
america-can-still-cost-you-a-lot-of-money .
29

--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
continued US stock market outperformance. We provide results for the full spectrum of exceptionalism
beliefs in the internet appendix.
5.6 Bootstrap design and investment opportunity set
Our findings on the strong performance of a fixed-weight, all-equity strategy may be surprising
given conventional wisdom. Our lifecycle simulation method detailed in Section 4 has two important
differences compared with common approaches: (i) we adopt a block bootstrap with long blocks (120
months on average) to preserve time-series dependencies in returns and (ii) we include international
stocks in the investment opportunity set. In Figure 7, we study the impact of these two design choices
using the age-based approach from Section 5.3.1. In each specification, we use either a block bootstrap
or an IID bootstrap (i.e., one-month blocks), and we include either domestic assets or all assets (i.e.,
including international stocks). The figure considers the four combinations of these two choices, with
the all-block approach in Panel D being repeated from Figure 6.
Figure 7 reveals important differences in optimal age-based strategies depending on design choices.
In all cases, pre-retirement portfolios are fully invested in stocks. At age 65, however, the strategies differ
sharply . The domestic-IID case in Panel A has 14% in bonds and 48% in bills versus 0% in bonds and 27%
in bills for the all-block case in Panel D. Each design features rising optimal equity allocations during
the retirement years, but stock-bond allocations differ substantially across the specifications. Across
the four cases, we observe two patterns with respect to design choices. First, using a block bootstrap
reduces the attractiveness of bonds relative to using an IID bootstrap. Second, adding international
stocks to the investment opportunity set reduces the allocation to bonds and bills. Households invest
in fixed income at every age post-retirement when limited to domestic assets, but do not with access to
international stocks.
Figure 7 helps to reconcile our findings of strong performance for an all-equity strategy with the
conventional wisdom that retirees should invest in “conservative” bonds and bills. The domestic-IID
approach resembles the analyses in many academic and practitioner outlets (e.g., those using monthly
return moments from US stocks and bonds to calibrate models). This similarity may explain the widespread
support for age-based, stock-bond investing. But the domestic-IID method misses two important aspects
of modeling the investment opportunity set. First, returns are not IID. Given that the time-series depen-
dencies in returns have an important impact on optimal asset allocation, it seems difficult to justify an
IID assumption. Second, international stocks are an attractive asset class. They provide diversification
to domestic stock investors and also offer high expected returns. The all-equity , fixed-weight strategy is
30

--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
supported by the data when we account for these features of the investment opportunity set.
6 Conclusion
We challenge two central tenets of lifecycle investing — savers should diversify across stocks and
bonds and the young should invest more heavily in stocks than the old. These principles underly main-
stream investment advice and permeate regulations for DC pension plans. We find that investors with
access to international stocks and subject to a realistic no-leverage constraint on retirement savings
optimally choose an all-equity portfolio. There is no significant economic benefit from holding bonds
at any point during their lifetimes. The long-horizon return data suggest that diversifying with inter-
national stocks, rather than with bonds, improves investor outcomes for long-term appreciation and
capital preservation. Our block bootstrap approach is key for modeling these long-horizon outcomes
when investors are faced with non-normalities and changing investment opportunities.
Despite the dominance of the internationally diversified, all-equity strategy in achieving retirement
outcomes, investors and regulators may be uncomfortable with the risk of large intermediate drawdowns
in stocks. Drawdowns can inflict intense psychological pain, and one worry is that some investors will
abandon their investments rather than stay the course. Contrary to common intuition, however, the
QDIAs, with their large bond allocations, carry the potential for even larger drawdowns in real terms.
These strategies also expose investors to greater risk of exhausting their savings. Our results, as a whole,
do not suggest that the all-equity strategy is safe; they merely suggest that it is safer than common
alternatives. Given the relative safety and strong growth potential of equities, retirement savers and
retirees would likely benefit from adopting a “set it and forget it” strategy that fully invests in domestic
and international stocks.
31

--- PDF PAGE 33 ---
References
Anarkulova, Aizhan, Scott Cederburg, and Michael S. O’Doherty, 2022, Stocks for the long run? Evi-
dence from a broad sample of developed markets, Journal of Financial Economics 143, 409–433.
, 2025, Long-horizon losses in stocks, bonds, and bills, Working paper, Emory University .
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2002, International asset allocation with regime shifts,Review of Finan-
cial Studies 15, 1137–1187.
, 2004, How regimes affect asset allocation, Financial Analysts Journal 60, 86–99.
Asness, Clifford S., 1996, Why not 100% equities, Journal of Portfolio Management 22, 29–34.
Avdis, Efstathios, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2017, Maximum likelihood estimation of the equity premium,
Journal of Financial Economics 125, 589–609.
Bagliano, Fabio C., Carolina Fugazza, and Givanna Nicodano, 2019, Life-cycle portfolios, unemployment
and human capital loss, Journal of Macroeconomics 60, 325–340.
Bali, Turan G., K. Ozgur Demirtas, Haim Levy , and Avner Wolf, 2009, Bonds versus stocks: Investors’
age and risk taking, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 817–830.
Barberis, Nicholas C., 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of Finance
55, 225–264.
Baxter, Marianne, and Urban J. Jermann, 1997, The international diversification puzzle is worse than
you think, American Economic Review 87, 170–180.
Bekaert, Geert, Kenton Hoyem, Wei-Yin Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina, 2017, Who is internationally diver-
sified? Evidence from the 401(k) plans of 296 firms, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 86–112.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Naive diversification strategies in defined contribution
saving plans, American Economic Review 91, 79–98.
Bengen, William P ., 1994, Determining withdrawal rates using historical data,Journal of Financial Plan-
ning 7, 171–180.
Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2007, Portfolio choice over the life-cycle
when the stock and labor markets are cointegrated, Journal of Finance 62, 2123–2167.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2018, Behavioral household
finance, in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds.: Handbook of Behav-
ioral Economics: Foundations and Applications 1 (Elsevier), Amsterdam, pp. 177–276.
Blanchett, David M., David M. Cordell, Michael S. Finke, and Thomas M. Idzorek, 2023, Risk manage-
ment for individuals, https://cfainstitute.org/membership/professional-development/
refresher-readings/risk-management-individuals , 2024 CFA Program Refresher Reading.
Bodie, Zvi, Alex Kane, and Alan Marcus, 2024, Investments. McGraw Hill, New York, NY, 13th edn.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F . Samuelson, 1992, Labor supply flexibility and portfolio
choice in a life cycle model, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427–449.
32

--- PDF PAGE 34 ---
Bonaparte, Yosef, George M. Korniotis, Alok Kumar, Alexander Michaelides, and Yuxin Zhang, 2024,
Stock market ownership transitions, Forthcoming in Management Science.
Bremus, Franziska M., and Vladimir Kuzin, 2014, Unemployment and portfolio choice: Does persistence
matter?, Journal of Macroeconomics 40, 99–113.
Brennan, Michael J., Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1997, Strategic asset allocation, Jour-
nal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1377–1403.
Bretscher, Lorenzo, Christian Julliard, and Carlo Rosa, 2016, Human capital and international portfolio
diversification: A reappraisal, Journal of International Economics 99, 578–596.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and Stephen A. Ross, 1995, Survival,Journal of Finance 50,
853–873.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, Francisco Gomes, and Paolo Sodini, 2023, The cross-section of
household preferences, Working paper, SKEMA Business School.
Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.
, 2016, Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer financial regulation, American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 106, 1–30.
Campbell, John Y., Yeung Lewis Chan, and Luis M. Viceira, 2003, A multivariate model of strategic asset
allocation, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 41–80.
Campbell, John Y., João F . Cocco, Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2001, Investing retire-
ment wealth: A life-cycle model, in Risk Aspects for Investment-Based Social Security Reform .
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, Consumption and portfolio decisions when expected
returns are time varying, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433–495.
, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-T erm Investors . Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.
, 2005, The term structure of the risk–return trade-off, Financial Analysts Journal 61, 34–44.
Catherine, Sylvain, 2022, Countercyclical labor income risk and portfolio choices over the life cycle,
Review of Financial Studies 35, 4016–4054.
Chacko, George, and Luis M. Viceira, 2005, Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with stochastic
volatility in incomplete markets, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1369–1402.
Chai, Jingjing, Wolfram Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2011, Optimal portfolio choice
over the life cycle with flexible work, endogenous retirement, and lifetime payouts,Review of Finance
15, 875–907.
Cheng, Minder, and Ananth Madhavan, 2009, The dynamics of leveraged and inverse exchange-traded
funds, Journal of Investment Management 7, 43–62.
Choi, James J., 2022, Popular personal financial advice versus the professors, Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 36, 167–192.
Choukhmane, Taha, and Tim de Silva, 2024, What drives investors’ portfolio choices? Separating risk
preferences from frictions, Forthcoming in Journal of Finance .
33

--- PDF PAGE 35 ---
Cocco, João F ., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2005, Consumption and portfolio choice
over the life cycle, Review of Financial Studies 18, 491–533.
Cochrane, John H., 2014, A mean-variance benchmark for intertemporal portfolio theory , Journal of
Finance 69, 1–49.
, 2022, Portfolios for long-term investors, Review of Finance 26, 1–42.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, and Hélène Rey, 2013, Home bias in open economy financial macroeconomics,
Journal of Economic Literature 51, 63–115.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Ofer Setty , and Roine Vestman, 2018, On the asset allocation of a default pension
fund, Journal of Finance 73, 1893–1936.
Davis, Steven J., Felix Kubler, and Paul Willen, 2006, Borrowing costs and the demand for equity over
the life cycle, Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 348–362.
Davis, Steven J., and Paul Willen, 2000, Using financial assets to hedge labor income risk: Estimating
the benefits, Working paper, University of Chicago.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones, 2010, Why do the elderly save? The role of
medical expenses, Journal of Political Economy 118, 39–75.
Dimson, Elroy , Paul R. Marsh, and Michael Staunton, 2002,Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Y ears of Global
Investment Returns. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Duarte, Victor, Julia Fonseca, Aaron Goodman, and Jonathan A. Parker, 2024, Simple allocation rules
and optimal portfolio choice over the lifecycle, Working paper, University of Illinois.
Duggan, Julián Antonio, 1963, La colocación de los empréstitos externos: la Argentina y los mercados
de capitales, Working paper, Universidad de Buenos Aires.
Eun, Cheol S., and Bruce G. Resnick, 1988, Exchange rate uncertainty , forward contracts, and interna-
tional portfolio selection, Journal of Finance 43, 197–215.
, 1994, International diversification of investment portfolios: U.S. and Japanese perspectives,
Management Science 40, 140–161.
Fagereng, Andreas, Charles Gottlieb, and Luigi Guiso, 2017, Asset market participation and portfolio
choice over the life-cycle, Journal of Finance 72, 705–750.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2018, Portfolio choices, firm shocks, and uninsur-
able wage risk, Review of Economic Studies 85, 437–474.
Fagereng, Andreas, Martin Blomhoff Holm, Benjamin Moll, and Gisle Natvik, 2021, Saving behavior
across the wealth distribution: The importance of capital gains, Working paper, BI Norwegian Busi-
ness School.
Fama, Eugene F ., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium,Journal of Finance 57, 637–659.
Fama, Eugene F ., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Human capital and capital market equilibrium,Journal
of Financial Economics 4, 95–125.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Stavros Panageas, 2007, Saving and investing for early retirement: A theoretical
analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 87–121.
34

--- PDF PAGE 36 ---
Fischer, Gustav, 1923, Geld, Kredit, Währung, Volkswirtschaftliche Chronik Jahresübersicht 1923, 679–
708.
, 1924, Geld, Kredit, Währung, Volkswirtschaftliche Chronik December 1924.
, 1925, Geld, Kredit, Währung, Volkswirtschaftliche Chronik Jahresübersicht 1925.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta, Journal of Financial Economics
111, 1–25.
French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and international equity mar-
kets, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 81, 222–226.
Goda, Gopi Shah, Matthew R. Levy , Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron Sojourner, and Joshua Tasoff,
2020, Who is a passive saver under opt-in and auto-enrollment?, Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 173, 301–321.
Gomes, Francisco, 2020, Portfolio choice over the life cycle: A survey , Annual Review of Financial Eco-
nomics 12, 277–304.
Gomes, Francisco, Michael Haliassos, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2021, Household finance, Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 59, 919–1000.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, Optimal life-cycle asset allocation: Understanding
the empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 60, 869–904.
Gomes, Francisco, Alexander Michaelides, and Yuxin Zhang, 2022, Tactical target date funds, Manage-
ment Science 68, 3047–3070.
Gomes, Francisco, and Oksana Smirnova, 2023, Stock market participation and portfolio shares over
the life-cycle, Working paper, London Business School.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song, 2021, What do data on millions of U.S.
workers reveal about lifecycle earnings dynamics?, Econometrica 89, 2303–2339.
Heaton, John, and Deborah J. Lucas, 1997, Market frictions, savings behavior, and portfolio choice,
Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 76–101.
, 2000, Portfolio choice in the presence of background risk, Economic Journal 110, 1–26.
Hnatkovska, Viktoria, 2010, Home bias and high turnover: Dynamic portfolio choice with incomplete
markets, Journal of International Economics 80, 113–128.
Hoevenaars, Roy P .M.M., Roderick D.J. Molenaar, Petere C. Schotman, and Tom B.M. Steenkamp, 2008,
Strategic asset allocation with liabilities: Beyond stocks and bonds, Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 32, 2939–2970.
Hubener, Andreas, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2016, How family status and Social Security
claiming options shape optimal life cycle portfolios, Review of Financial Studies 29, 937–978.
Jeanneau, Serge, and Carlos Pérez Verdia, 2005, Reducing financial vulnerability: The development of
the domestic government bond market in Mexico, BIS Quarterly Review December 2005, 95–107.
Jordà, Òscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2019, The rate
of return on everything, 1870–2015, Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 1225–1298.
35

--- PDF PAGE 37 ---
Jorion, Philippe, 1985, International portfolio diversification with estimation risk, Journal of Business
58, 259–278.
Kang, Kenneth, Geena Kim, and Changyong Rhee, 2005, Developing the government bond market in
South Korea: History , challenges, and implications for Asian countries, Asian Economic Papers 4,
91–113.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Theo E. Nijman, and Bas J.M. Werker, 2010, When can life cycle investors benefit
from time-varying bond risk premia?, Review of Financial Studies 23, 741–780.
Koo, Hyeng Keun, 1998, Consumption and portfolio selection with labor income: A continuous time
approach, Mathematical Finance 8, 49–65.
Kraft, Holger, Claus Munk, and Farina Weiss, 2019, Predictors and portfolios over the life cycle,Journal
of Banking and Finance 100, 1–27.
Kuznets, Simon, 1973, Modern economic growth: Findings and reflections, American Economic Review
63, 247–258.
Longin, François, and Bruno Solnik, 2001, Extreme correlation of international equity markets,Journal
of Finance 56, 649–676.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2007, Baby Boomer retirement security: The roles of plan-
ning, financial literacy , and housing wealth,Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205–224.
, 2011, Financial literacy and retirement planning in the United States, Journal of Pension Eco-
nomics & Finance 10, 509–525.
Lynch, Anthony W ., 2001, Portfolio choice and equity characteristics: Characterizing the hedging
demands induced by return predictability ,Journal of Financial Economics 62, 67–130.
Lynch, Anthony W ., and Pierluigi Balduzzi, 2000, Predictability and transaction costs: The impact on
rebalancing rules and behavior, Journal of Finance 55, 2285–2310.
Lynch, Anthony W ., and Sinan Tan, 2010, Multiple risky assets, transaction costs, and return predictabil-
ity: Allocation rules and implications for U.S. investors,Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
45, 1015–1053.
, 2011, Labor income dynamics at business-cycle frequencies: Implications for portfolio choice,
Journal of Financial Economics 101, 333–359.
Macaulay , Frederick R., 1938, Some theoretical problems suggested by the movements of interest rates,
bond yields and stock prices in the United States since 1856 . National Bureau of Economic Research,
New York, NY.
Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F . Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation
and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149–1187.
Merton, Robert C., 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case,
Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247–257.
, 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model, Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 3, 373–413.
36

--- PDF PAGE 38 ---
Michaelides, Alexander, 2003, International portfolio choice, liquidity constaints and the home equity
bias puzzle, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 555–594.
Michaelides, Alexander, and Yuxin Zhang, 2017, Stock market mean reversion and portfolio choice over
the life cycle, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52, 1183–1209.
, 2022, Life-cycle portfolio choice with imperfect predictors,Journal of Banking and Finance 135,
106357.
Mitchell, Olivia S., and Stephen P . Utkus, 2022, Target-date funds and portfolio choice in 401(k) plans,
Journal of Pension Economics & Finance 21, 519–536.
Pacholok, Megan, 2024, 2024 Target-Date Strategy Landscape, https://www.morningstar.com/lp/
tdf-landscape, Morningstar Research.
Parker, Jonathan A., Antoinette Schoar, Allison T . Cole, and Duncan Simester, 2023, Household portfo-
lios and retirement saving over the life cycle, Forthcoming in Journal of Finance .
Parker, Jonathan A., Antoinette Schoar, and Yang Sun, 2023, Retail financial innovation and stock market
dynamics: The case of target date funds, Journal of Finance 78, 2673–2723.
Pástor, L ’uboš, and Robert F . Stambaugh, 2012, Are stocks really less volatile in the long run?,Journal
of Finance 67, 431–477.
Politis, Dimitris N., and Joseph P . Romano, 1994, The stationary bootstrap, Journal of the American
Statistical Association 89, 1303–1313.
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise, 2011, The composition and drawdown of wealth in
retirement, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 95–118.
Poterba, James M., 2003, Employer stock and 401(k) plans, American Economic Review 93, 398–404.
Poterba, James M., Joshua Rauh, Steven F . Venti, and David A. Wise, 2005, Utility evaluation of risk in
retirement savings accounts, in David A. Wise, ed.: Analyses in the Economics of Aging (University of
Chicago Press), Chicago, IL, pp. 13–52.
, 2009, Life-cycle asset allocation strategies and the distribution of 401(k) retirement wealth, in
David A. Wise, ed.: Developments in the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago Press), Chicago,
IL, pp. 15–50.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence and
implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27–59.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2011, The forgotten history of domestic debt, Economic
Journal 121, 319–350.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming, Review of
Economics and Statistics 51, 239–246.
Sangvinatsos, Antonios, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2005, Does the failure of the expectations hypothesis
matter for long-term investors?, Journal of Finance 60, 179–230.
Schnabl, Gunther, 2019, The 1948 German currency and economic reform: Lessons for European mon-
etary policy ,Cato Journal 39, 607–634.
37

--- PDF PAGE 39 ---
Shearer, Ronald A., and Carolyn Clark, 1984, Canada and the interwar gold standard, 1920-35: Mone-
tary policy without a Central Bank, in Michael D. Bordo, and Anna J. Schwartz, eds.: A retrospective
on the classical gold standard, 1821-1931 (University of Chicago Press), Chicago, IL, pp. 277–310.
Shen, Jialu, 2024, Countercyclical risks, consumption, and portfolio choice: Theory and evidence,Man-
agement Science 70, 2862–2881.
Siegel, Jeremy, 2014, Stocks for the Long Run . McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Solnik, Bruno H., 1974, Why not diversify internationally rather than domestically?, Financial Analysts
Journal 30, 48–54.
van Binsbergen, Jules H., William F . Diamond, and Marco Grotteria, 2022, Risk-free interest rates,
Journal of Financial Economics 143, 1–29.
van Binsbergen, Jules H., Sophia Hua, Jonas Peeters, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2025, Is the United States
a lucky survivor: A hierarchical Bayesian approach, Forthcoming in Journal of Finance .
van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie, 2011, Financial literacy and stock market
participation, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 449–472.
Vanguard, 2024, How America Saves 2024,https://institutional.vanguard.com/content/dam/
inst/iig-transformation/insights/pdf/2024/has/how_america_saves_report_2024.
pdf.
Venti, Steven F ., and David A. Wise, 1991, Aging and the income value of housing wealth, Journal of
Public Economics 44, 371–397.
Viceira, Luis M., 2001, Optimal portfolio choice for long-horizon investors with nontradable labor
income, Journal of Finance 56, 433–470.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2002, Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting returns: An exact
solution for complete markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 63–91.
Zettelmeyer, Jeromin, Christoph Trebesch, and Mitu Gulati, 2013, The Greek debt restructuring: An
autopsy ,Economic Policy 28, 513–563.
38

--- PDF PAGE 40 ---
Table I: Empirical properties of real returns for bonds and international stocks
The table summarizes the empirical properties of real returns for bonds and international stocks. The underlying
data are a monthly panel of real asset class returns for 39 developed countries covering the period from 1890 to
2023. The dataset formation details are provided in Section 3. Panel A reports the annualized mean and standard
deviation of real returns for each asset class. The mean and standard deviation for bonds are based on a sample
that excludes data for Germany in 1923. Panel B reports variance ratios for each asset class at horizons of one,
ten, 20, and 30 years. Panel C reports the correlation of the log return for each asset class with the log return for
domestic stocks (based on monthly and 30-year returns) and with log inflation (based on 30-year returns). The
statistics reported in Panels B and C are based on a bootstrap simulation.
Asset class
Measure Bonds International stocks
Panel A: Moments of annualized real returns
Mean (%) 0.95 7.03
Standard deviation (%) 9.51 23.26
Panel B: Variance ratios
VR(1) 1.00 1.00
VR(10) 2.09 0.88
VR(20) 2.26 0.80
VR(30) 2.30 0.75
Panel C: Log real return correlations
Correlation with domestic stocks (monthly returns) 0.21 0.33
Correlation with domestic stocks (30-year returns) 0.45 0.34
Correlation with inflation (30-year returns) −0.78 −0.01
39

--- PDF PAGE 41 ---
Table II: Sample coverage and summary statistics
For each developed country , the table reports the sample period start date, the sample period end date, and summary statistics (i.e., geometric mean return
and standard deviation of return) of monthly real returns for domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills. The development classification and
sample formation criteria are described in the internet appendix.
Asset class returns
Domestic International
stocks stocks Bonds Bills
Country Sample start Sample end Mean StDev Mean StDev Mean StDev Mean StDev
Denmark 1890:01 2023:12 0.46 3.58 0.39 3.93 0.20 1.89 0.17 0.73
France 1890:01 2023:12 0.26 5.40 0.45 6.58 −0.08 2.28 −0.16 1.74
Germany 1890:01 2023:12 0.25 8.29 0.56 10.20 −0.14 45.61 0.15 0.86
United Kingdom 1890:01 2023:12 0.41 4.25 0.43 4.09 0.13 1.98 0.06 0.87
United States 1890:01 2023:12 0.52 5.01 0.34 3.85 0.12 1.76 0.06 0.61
Canada 1891:01 2023:12 0.48 4.26 0.44 3.48 0.18 1.66 0.11 0.57
New Zealand 1896:01 2023:12 0.47 3.66 0.44 4.06 0.13 1.84 0.14 0.58
Belgium 1897:01 2023:12 0.21 5.03 0.39 4.57 0.02 1.79 −0.04 1.13
Australia 1901:01 2023:12 0.57 3.96 0.43 3.75 0.14 1.73 0.06 0.53
Sweden 1910:01 2023:12 0.47 4.85 0.45 4.15 0.14 1.86 0.08 0.96
Netherlands 1914:01 2023:12 0.41 5.19 0.41 4.39 0.13 1.73 0.01 0.80
Norway 1914:01 2023:12 0.37 4.62 0.44 4.19 0.13 1.73 0.02 0.85
Switzerland 1914:01 2023:12 0.38 4.30 0.37 4.47 0.14 1.41 0.02 0.61
Austria 1920:01 2023:12 0.22 7.27 0.57 12.79 −0.38 4.51 −0.46 3.68
Czechoslovakia 1922:05 1945:05 −0.14 6.56 0.41 6.24 0.69 3.28 0.34 3.06
Chile period I 1927:01 1970:12 0.13 6.15 0.60 8.55 −0.92 3.38 −0.86 2.34
Japan 1930:01 2023:12 0.31 6.59 0.51 15.92 −0.18 3.40 −0.32 2.60
Italy 1931:01 2023:12 0.19 7.38 0.43 12.98 −0.14 2.56 −0.25 1.68
Portugal 1934:01 2023:12 0.14 7.82 0.44 4.10 0.02 2.81 −0.06 1.34
Ireland 1936:01 2023:12 0.45 4.77 0.46 4.08 0.16 2.40 0.01 0.59
Argentina 1947:02 1966:12 −0.18 8.53 0.64 15.33 −1.66 2.84 −1.56 2.73
Spain 1959:01 2023:12 0.28 5.58 0.39 4.25 0.14 2.22 0.00 0.69
Finland 1969:01 2023:12 0.73 6.24 0.41 4.35 0.24 2.26 0.03 0.47
Greece 1981:02 2023:12 0.48 10.23 0.55 4.77 0.30 5.41 0.14 1.29
Luxembourg 1982:01 2023:12 0.55 5.75 0.57 4.51 0.28 1.88 0.10 0.57
Singapore 1998:07 2023:12 0.44 5.74 0.29 4.09 0.14 2.04 −0.04 0.48
(Continued on next page)
40

--- PDF PAGE 42 ---
T able II (Continued)
Asset class returns
Domestic International
stocks stocks Bonds Bills
Country Sample start Sample end Mean StDev Mean StDev Mean StDev Mean StDev
Hungary 1999:02 2023:12 0.35 6.52 0.26 4.21 0.17 3.49 0.09 0.53
Poland 1999:06 2023:12 0.26 6.20 0.21 3.78 0.22 2.92 0.12 0.53
Slovakia 2000:01 2023:12 0.17 5.10 −0.02 4.26 0.24 2.96 −0.12 0.62
Czech Republic 2000:05 2023:12 0.77 6.92 0.01 4.23 0.08 2.45 −0.10 0.63
South Korea 2000:11 2023:12 0.63 6.18 0.34 3.93 0.25 2.02 0.06 0.36
Mexico 2001:08 2023:12 0.62 4.94 0.44 3.72 0.29 2.67 0.14 0.40
Iceland 2002:01 2023:12 0.02 7.27 0.33 4.80 0.16 3.16 0.14 0.54
Chile period II 2010:01 2023:12 −0.01 4.89 0.70 3.99 −0.05 1.93 −0.02 0.43
Israel 2010:01 2023:12 0.01 5.07 0.68 3.63 0.28 2.14 0.09 0.87
Slovenia 2010:01 2023:12 0.41 4.75 0.72 3.79 0.09 2.69 −0.10 0.80
Türkiye 2010:02 2023:12 0.36 7.42 1.11 6.49 −0.79 6.92 −0.47 1.77
Latvia 2016:01 2023:12 0.47 4.42 0.40 4.09 −0.51 2.23 −0.36 0.82
Lithuania 2018:01 2023:12 0.02 3.85 0.26 4.57 −0.82 2.76 −0.46 0.80
Colombia 2020:01 2023:12 −0.79 9.02 0.46 4.75 −0.44 4.27 −0.08 0.51
41

--- PDF PAGE 43 ---
Table III: Economic value of alternative investment plans
Panel A reports the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills for the optimal
static asset allocation policy , and Panel B reports the asset allocation weights for four benchmark investment
strategies. The weights for the TDF strategy change over the lifecycle following the glide path shown in Figure 2.
The column titled “QDIA” indicates whether the strategy is classified as a Qualified Default Investment Alternative
under the Pension Protection Act of 2006. The final column of the table reports equivalent savings rates to quantify
relative economic value in pairwise comparisons of the optimal static asset allocation strategy with each alternative
asset allocation strategy . Each comparison is based on expected household utility over retirement consumption
and bequest across 1,000,000 bootstrap simulations. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed
in Section 4. The household’s savings rate for the base strategy (i.e., the optimal static asset allocation strategy)
in the pre-retirement period is 10%. The equivalent savings rate is the household’s savings rate for the alternative
strategy that equates the expected utility from retirement consumption and bequest for the two strategies.
Asset class weights
Domestic International Equivalent
Strategy QDIA stocks stocks Bonds Bills savings rate
Panel A: Base strategy
Optimal No 33% 67% 0% 0% —
Panel B: Alternative strategies
Bills No 0% 0% 0% 100% 56.2%
Domestic Stocks No 100% 0% 0% 0% 16.3%
Balanced Yes 60% 0% 40% 0% 19.3%
TDF Yes [10%, 54%] [7%, 36%] [10%, 73%] [0%, 10%] 16.1%
42

--- PDF PAGE 44 ---
Table IV: Retirement saving outcomes
The table summarizes the distributions of real wealth at retirement (Panel A), the real income replacement rate
(Panel B), and real wealth at death (Panel C) across 1,000,000 bootstrap simulations for households adopting
various asset allocation strategies. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Section 4. For
each asset allocation strategy , the table reports the mean, standard deviation, and distribution percentiles of each
measure of investment performance. Real wealth at retirement and real wealth at death are reported in millions
of 2022 USD.
Moments Percentiles
Strategy Mean StDev 1% 5% 10% 25% 50% 75% 90% 95% 99%
Panel A: Wealth at retirement ($MM)
Bills 0.27 0.21 0.00 0.03 0.06 0.13 0.23 0.36 0.53 0.65 0.98
Domestic Stocks 1.02 1.75 0.00 0.07 0.14 0.30 0.61 1.18 2.14 3.13 6.79
Balanced 0.71 1.94 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.26 0.48 0.85 1.40 1.91 3.73
TDF 0.77 1.30 0.00 0.09 0.16 0.31 0.55 0.93 1.49 2.00 3.78
Optimal 1.07 1.43 0.00 0.13 0.22 0.41 0.74 1.27 2.11 2.91 5.94
Panel B: Income replacement rate
Bills 0.70 1.27 0.00 0.43 0.49 0.57 0.66 0.78 0.93 1.06 1.73
Domestic Stocks 1.18 1.63 0.00 0.50 0.59 0.73 0.95 1.31 1.90 2.52 4.82
Balanced 0.99 1.71 0.00 0.50 0.57 0.70 0.86 1.10 1.45 1.79 3.07
TDF 1.03 1.55 0.00 0.52 0.60 0.73 0.90 1.15 1.51 1.86 3.16
Optimal 1.24 1.56 0.00 0.59 0.68 0.83 1.05 1.39 1.91 2.43 4.56
Panel C: Wealth at death ($MM)
Bills 0.08 0.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.11 0.23 0.34 0.64
Domestic Stocks 2.61 14.71 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.59 1.93 5.29 9.76 31.65
Balanced 1.10 8.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.35 0.98 2.29 3.83 10.65
TDF 0.72 5.21 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.27 0.73 1.57 2.47 6.00
Optimal 2.94 11.25 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.37 1.03 2.59 5.99 10.18 30.54
43

--- PDF PAGE 45 ---
Table V: Portfolio drawdowns
The table summarizes the distributions of the maximum portfolio drawdown during the pre-retirement period
(Panel A) and the maximum portfolio drawdown during the post-retirement period (Panel B) across 1,000,000
bootstrap simulations for households adopting various asset allocation strategies. The lifecycle design and boot-
strap assumptions are detailed in Section 4. For each asset allocation strategy and drawdown period, the table
reports the mean, standard deviation, and distribution percentiles of the maximum portfolio drawdown.
Moments Percentiles
Strategy Mean StDev 1% 5% 10% 25% 50% 75% 90% 95% 99%
Panel A: Working-period drawdown
Bills 0.42 0.26 0.04 0.09 0.13 0.22 0.37 0.57 0.84 0.96 1.00
Domestic Stocks 0.67 0.16 0.32 0.41 0.46 0.55 0.66 0.78 0.91 0.96 0.99
Balanced 0.54 0.19 0.23 0.29 0.32 0.41 0.50 0.66 0.85 0.92 0.99
TDF 0.52 0.16 0.22 0.28 0.32 0.41 0.51 0.61 0.74 0.81 0.94
Optimal 0.55 0.12 0.24 0.31 0.38 0.48 0.56 0.61 0.68 0.76 0.91
Panel B: Retirement-period drawdown
Bills 0.46 0.30 0.00 0.03 0.09 0.22 0.42 0.69 0.94 0.98 1.00
Domestic Stocks 0.62 0.21 0.00 0.27 0.35 0.49 0.63 0.77 0.91 0.96 0.99
Balanced 0.50 0.23 0.00 0.18 0.24 0.34 0.47 0.66 0.85 0.92 0.98
TDF 0.40 0.23 0.00 0.11 0.15 0.23 0.35 0.54 0.76 0.89 0.99
Optimal 0.48 0.17 0.00 0.19 0.25 0.38 0.52 0.59 0.66 0.74 0.88
Table VI: Optimal dynamic asset allocation policy conditional on the aggregate price-dividend ratio
The table reports the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills for the optimal
dynamic asset allocation policy that conditions on the aggregate price-dividend ratio. The lifecycle design and
bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Sections 4 and 5.3.4.
Optimal asset class weights
Domestic International
Market state Aggregate Pt /Dt stocks stocks Bonds Bills
Panel A: Static asset allocation
All [0, ∞) 33% 67% 0% 0%
Panel B: Dynamic asset allocation
Low Pt /Dt [0, 18.76] 65% 35% 0% 0%
2 (18.76, 23.47] 28% 72% 0% 0%
3 (23.47, 29.94] 30% 70% 0% 0%
4 (29.94, 43.67] 31% 69% 0% 0%
High Pt /Dt (43.67, ∞) 16% 75% 9% 0%
44

--- PDF PAGE 46 ---
Table VII: Optimal static asset allocation policies under alternative design parameters
Panel A reports the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills for the optimal
static asset allocation policy under the base case design. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are
detailed in Section 4. The subsequent panels report the optimal asset allocation policies under alternative design
assumptions, as described in the table.
Optimal asset class weights
Domestic International Borrowing
Description stocks stocks Bonds Bills (% of wealth)
Panel A: Base case
Base case 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel B: Alternative samples
Post-World War II sample 31% 69% 0% 0% N/A
Countries with large populations 27% 73% 0% 0% N/A
Countries with large market cap-to-GDP ratios 27% 73% 0% 0% N/A
Ex-United States sample 45% 55% 0% 0% N/A
Panel C: Average block length
Block length parameter b = 12 32% 68% 0% 0% N/A
Block length parameter b = 60 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Block length parameter b = 240 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel D: Risk aversion
Risk aversion parameter γ = 0.5 32% 68% 0% 0% N/A
Risk aversion parameter γ = 1.0 35% 65% 0% 0% N/A
Risk aversion parameter γ = 2.0 35% 65% 0% 0% N/A
Risk aversion parameter γ = 5.0 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Risk aversion parameter γ = 7.5 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Risk aversion parameter γ = 10.0 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel E: Bequest
No bequest motive (θ = 0) 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Utility only from bequest (θ = ∞) 34% 66% 0% 0% N/A
Panel F: Household utility specification
Consumption scaled by household size 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Subjective discount factor δ = 0.981/12 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel G: Withdrawal strategy
3% rule (rw = 3%) 34% 66% 0% 0% N/A
5% rule (rw = 5%) 34% 66% 0% 0% N/A
4% of current account value 34% 66% 0% 0% N/A
Panel H: Retirement age
Retirement at age 62 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Retirement at age 67 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Retirement at age 70 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
(Continued on next page)
45

--- PDF PAGE 47 ---
T able VII (Continued)
Optimal asset class weights
Domestic International Borrowing
Description stocks stocks Bonds Bills (% of wealth)
Panel I: Contribution rules
Contribution rate rc = 5% 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Contribution rate rc = 15% 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Lower income limit Ymin = $0 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Lower income limit Ymin = $45,000 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel J: Household type
Single female 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Single male 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Both female 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Both male 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Panel K: Investor type
Low initial income and low human capital 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
Low initial income and high human capital 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
High initial income and low human capital 33% 67% 0% 0% N/A
High initial income and high human capital 32% 68% 0% 0% N/A
Panel L: Correlation between persistent earnings shocks and domestic stock returns
Income-domestic stock correlation of 0.1 30% 70% 0% 0% N/A
Income-domestic stock correlation of 0.2 27% 73% 0% 0% N/A
Income-domestic stock correlation of 0.3 24% 76% 0% 0% N/A
Income-domestic stock correlation of 0.4 21% 79% 0% 0% N/A
Income-domestic stock correlation of 0.5 18% 82% 0% 0% N/A
Panel M: Leverage
Borrowing spread of 6.50% (high) 33% 67% 0% 0% 0%
Borrowing spread of 1.40% (medium) 34% 66% 0% 0% 55%
Borrowing spread of 0.37% (low) 28% 57% 15% 0% 100%
46

--- PDF PAGE 48 ---
(A) Monthly moments, domestic assets
2 4 6 8 10
Risk aversion coefficient
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
Domestic stocks
International stocks
Bonds
Bills
(B) Monthly moments, all assets
2 4 6 8 10
Risk aversion coefficient
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
(C) 30-year moments, domestic assets
2 4 6 8 10
Risk aversion coefficient
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
(D) 30-year moments, all assets
2 4 6 8 10
Risk aversion coefficient
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
Figure 1. Mean-variance asset allocation. The figure shows the optimal asset allocation for a mean-variance
investor as a function of investor risk aversion. The strategies in Panels A and C invest in domestic stocks,
bonds, and bills. The strategies in Panels B and D add international stocks. For the results in Panels A and B,
the investor estimates portfolio risk using a covariance matrix based on the realized monthly log real returns
from a panel of 39 developed countries covering the period from 1890 to 2023. For the results in Panels C
and D, the investor estimates portfolio risk using simulated 30-year log real returns from the same developed-
country sample by dividing the covariance matrix by 360 to scale to a monthly level.
47

--- PDF PAGE 49 ---
-40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Years since retirement
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%Asset allocation
Domestic stocks
International stocks
Bonds
Bills
Figure 2. Glidepath weights for the target-date fund. The figure shows the asset allocation of the target-date
strategy as a function of time since retirement. The strategy invests in domestic stocks, international stocks,
bonds, and bills.
48

--- PDF PAGE 50 ---
25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Age
$0
$20,000
$40,000
$60,000
$80,000
$100,000
$120,000
$140,000
$160,000
$180,000Household income
Mean
Median
Figure 3. Distribution of household income. The figure shows the distribution of real household income across
1,000,000 bootstrap simulations in 2022 USD as a function of age. Household income is stochastic and follows
the process estimated by Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2021) with an initial income parameter of
zi
0 = 0 and human capital parameters of (αi, β i) = (0, 0). The solid (dashed) line corresponds to the median
(mean) household income as a function of age. The shaded region covers the 10th through 90th percentiles
of the distribution.
49

--- PDF PAGE 51 ---
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Allocation to domestic stocks
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%Equivalent savings rate
(A) Alternative equity allocations
Optimal static allocation
0% 10% 20% 30% 40%
Allocation to bonds
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%Equivalent savings rate
(B) Addition of bonds
0% 10% 20% 30% 40%
Allocation to bills
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%Equivalent savings rate
(C) Addition of bills
Figure 4. Equivalent savings rates for deviations from the optimal static portfolio. The figure shows equiv-
alent savings rates to quantify relative economic value in pairwise comparisons of the optimal static asset
allocation strategy with alternative asset allocation strategies. Each comparison is based on expected house-
hold utility over retirement consumption and bequest across 1,000,000 bootstrap simulations. The lifecycle
design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Section 4. In each plot, the base strategy corresponds to
the optimal static allocation of 33% in domestic stocks and 67% in international stocks with a pre-retirement
period savings rate of 10%. The alternative strategies in Panel A adopt static allocations to domestic stocks
and international stocks, but deviate from the base strategy in weighting the two asset classes. The alternative
strategies in Panel B (Panel C) adopt the same relative allocation to domestic stocks and international stocks
as does the base strategy , but these strategies add a fixed allocation to bonds (bills). Each panel shows the
household’s equivalent savings rate for the indicated alternative strategy (i.e., the savings rate that equates
the expected utility from retirement consumption and bequest for the alternative and base strategies).
50

--- PDF PAGE 52 ---
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal$0.0
$0.5
$1.0
$1.5
$2.0Wealth ($MM)
(A) Wealth at retirement
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00Replacement rate
(B) Income replacement rate
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%Probability of ruin
(C) Financial ruin probability
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal$0.0
$1.5
$3.0
$4.5
$6.0Wealth ($MM)
(D) Wealth at death
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Drawdown
(E) Working-period drawdown
Bills DomStkBalancedTDF Optimal0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Drawdown
(F) Retirement-period drawdown
Figure 5. Measures of investment performance. The figure summarizes the distribution of real wealth at retire-
ment (Panel A), the distribution of the real income replacement rate (Panel B), the probability of financial
ruin (Panel C), the distribution of real wealth at death (Panel D), the distribution of the working-period draw-
down (Panel E), and the distribution of the retirement-period drawdown (Panel F) across 1,000,000 bootstrap
simulations for households adopting various asset allocation strategies. The lifecycle design and bootstrap
assumptions are detailed in Section 4. In each box-and-whiskers plot, the middle line corresponds to the
median, the box covers the interquartile range, and the whiskers cover the 10th through 90th percentiles.
51

--- PDF PAGE 53 ---
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%Asset allocation
Domestic stocks
International stocks
Bonds
Bills
Figure 6. Optimal dynamic asset allocation policy conditional on household age.The figure shows the invest-
ment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills for the optimal dynamic asset allo-
cation policy that conditions on household age. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed
in Sections 4 and 5.3.1. The vertical dashed line indicates the household’s exogenous retirement age.
52

--- PDF PAGE 54 ---
(A) IID bootstrap, domestic assets
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
(B) IID bootstrap, all assets
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
(C) Block bootstrap, domestic assets
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
Domestic stocks
International stocks
Bonds
Bills
(D) Block bootstrap, all assets
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%Asset allocation
Figure 7. Optimal dynamic asset allocation policy conditional on household age: Alternative bootstrap
designs and investment opportunity sets. The figure shows the optimal dynamic asset allocation policy
conditional on household age for various underlying bootstrap specifications and investment opportunity sets.
The simulations used to estimate the optimal strategies in Panels A and B are based on an IID bootstrap, and
those used to estimate the optimal strategies in Panels C and D are based on a block bootstrap with an average
block length of 120 months. The strategies in Panels A and C invest in domestic stocks, bonds, and bills. The
strategies in Panels B and D add international stocks. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are
detailed in Sections 4 and 5.3.1. In each panel, the vertical dashed line indicates the household’s exogenous
retirement age.
53

--- PDF PAGE 55 ---
Internet Appendix
“Beyond the Status Quo: A Critical Assessment of Lifecycle
Investment Advice”
A Data appendix
This appendix describes our development classification approach, data sources, calculations of asset
class returns, special data issues, and dataset validation. Section A.1 outlines our development classifi-
cation and data sources used to compute asset class returns. Sections A.2 to A.5 provide details on the
calculations of returns for domestic stocks, international stocks, government bonds, and government
bills, respectively , and special data issues related to each asset class. Section A.6 presents data construc-
tion details for other variables. Section A.7 compares our data on stock and bond returns with data
from alternative sources.
A.1 Development classification and data sources
We follow Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) to classify countries as developed. We
classify a given country as developed early in the sample period if its agricultural labor share is less
than 50% based on evidence about labor patterns from the economics literature[e.g., Kuznets (1973)].
Beginning with the formation of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) in 1948,
we use membership in the OEEC and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) to identify development dates.
To form a balanced panel, a given developed country is not included in our sample until its gov-
ernment issues ten-year bonds. Sample eligibility postdates development for several countries on this
basis. The sample eligibility date is the latest of 1890 (i.e., the sample period start date for our study),
the country development year, and the year in which the country first issued long-term bonds.
Table A.I displays the development date, reason for classification, sample eligibility date, and data
coverage for each country . In three instances, a previously developed country is reclassified as devel-
oping. These instances occur in Argentina, Chile, and Czechoslovakia, and each reclassification results
from substantial changes in governments and markets in these countries. Chile, the Czech Republic,
and Slovakia reenter the sample with membership in the OECD. We include the early periods in these
countries to avoid survivor bias.
For some countries, we have missing data at the beginning of the eligible period. Returns on a
diversified domestic stock index are the binding data constraint in each of these instances. No country
has data gaps in the middle or at the end of its series.
The primary source of data for our study is the GFDatabase from Global Financial Data (GFD). The
database contains long time series of total return indexes, price indexes, dividend-price ratios, and total
market capitalization for stocks; yields for ten-year government bonds and short-term bills; consumer
price indexes; and exchange rates for a broad set of countries. Table A.II reports the data series that we
use to compute monthly stock, bond, and bill returns for each country . As described in the footnotes to
Table A.II, we supplement the data from GFD with data from other sources.
A.2 Domestic stocks
The GFDatabase contains data for total return indexes, price indexes, and dividend-price ratios. It
includes stock market indexes that are created and calculated by stock exchanges (e.g., the Tokyo Stock
1

--- PDF PAGE 56 ---
Price Index from the Tokyo Stock Exchange), by well-known index providers (e.g., the S&P 500 Index),
or by GFD directly from original source documents. Multiple stock indexes are available in the database
for some countries and periods. We select a single index in these cases by considering the breadth of
market coverage and the length of historical coverage. We use a total return index whenever one is
available, and we otherwise use a price index and a dividend-price ratio to calculate returns.
For sample months in which a total return index is available, we calculate the monthly nominal
return,
RNominal stocks
i,t =
I T otal
i,t
I T otal
i,t−1
, (A1)
where I T otal
i,t is the total return index for country i at the end of month t and RNominal stocks
i,t is the gross
nominal return for country i in month t. If no total return index is available, we use price index and
dividend-price ratio data to calculate returns. We assume that the annual dividend reflected by the
reported dividend-price ratio is paid equally across months in the year. If I Price
i,t is the price index and
ˆDi,t is the estimated dividend (appropriately scaled to the level of the price index) for country i in
month t, then we calculate the monthly nominal return,
RNominal stocks
i,t =
I Price
i,t + ˆDi,t
I Price
i,t−1
. (A2)
Nominal returns reflect diversified investments in a broad country-level index. To calculate real
returns, we first calculate gross inflation,
Πi,t =
I CPI
i,t
I CPI
i,t−1
, (A3)
where I CPI
i,t is the consumer price index (CPI) for country i at the end of month t. We then calculate the
gross real return on domestic stocks,
RDomestic stocks
i,t =
RNominal stocks
i,t
Πi,t
. (A4)
This return calculation produces real returns that are denominated in the local currency of country i.
A.2.1 Data issues related to domestic stocks
Our treatments of special data issues mirror those in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022)
with minor exceptions. Details on the data adjustments required to compute nominal and real stock
returns for our developed country sample are available in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022)
and the corresponding internet appendix. Additional adjustments are described below.
We measure returns that are denominated in the primary home currency with one exception. Our
real returns for Germany are denominated in gold marks (rather than paper marks) for the 1917 to
1923 period. Extraordinary hyperinflation during this period complicates the calculation of real returns
based on nominal returns in paper marks, and the GFDatabase reports a series of stock market returns
denominated in gold marks.
The internet appendix for Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) outlines the smoothing
procedures used to fill gaps in return series for short periods in a few sample countries. In addition to
those cases, we apply a smoothing procedure to convert five- and seven-month return data for Austria
2

--- PDF PAGE 57 ---
over the period from January 1920 to February 1922 and quarterly return data for Belgium over the
period from May 1919 to January 1926 into time series of monthly returns. In particular, we make the
assumption of constant monthly returns within each period. We apply a similar procedure to quarterly
return data for Switzerland from February 1914 to July 1914 and from August 1916 to January 1921.
Czechoslovakia is missing return data for July 1921. We estimate returns for July 1921 and August
1921 using price index data for June 1921 and August 1921 under the assumption of a constant return
for July and August of 1921.
One difference between our sample construction approach and the one in Anarkulova, Cederburg,
and O’Doherty (2022) relates to the handling of multi-month return observations associated with stock
market disruptions and closures. There are 35 instances in which stock exchanges closed for extended
periods, typically as the result of a major war, political revolution, or banking crisis. Investors tend
to earn negative real returns in these periods, such that omitting countries or periods because of these
stock return data gaps induces an easy data bias. Table A.III reports cases of exchange closures or heavily
restricted trading during our sample period along with the corresponding nominal and real returns. The
bootstrap procedure in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) treats each of these events as a
single return observation covering a multi-month period. This treatment reflects that most investors
would have been unable to trade during these periods, such that they could only wait for the eventual
realizations of the longer-period returns. Such treatment is not ideal for our multi-asset analysis, which
requires a balanced panel of monthly asset returns for each country . At the same time, we need the data
to reflect the economic outcomes of stock market investors.
In our current approach to handling multi-month returns, we take the perspective of an investor in a
hypothetical fund attempting to track the market index for a given country . Although this investor could
not directly liquidate her stock holdings via exchange trades during times of market closure, she could
sell her shares in the hypothetical fund. The fund’s managers, in turn, could either rely on black market
data for valuation purposes or produce an estimate of the historical event’s impact on asset prices at the
beginning of the closure period. Based on this perspective, we apply one of two approaches to handling
multi-month returns:
1. For events during which GFD provides black market prices, we use these values to estimate stock
market index returns.
2. For events without corresponding data in GFD, we assign the total multi-month real return to the
first monthly observation and zero real return to the remaining monthly observations.
The three exceptions to this general approach correspond to Austria’s 113-month return from July 1939
to November 1948, Switzerland’s 24-month return from August 1914 to July 1916, and Czechoslovakia’s
26-month return from April 1943 to May 1945. For Austria, GFD reports limited black market data in
January 1943, April 1946, and from November 1946 to November 1948. We use these intermittent
values and assign the remaining part of the total real return to July 1939. Similarly for Switzerland, we
use GFD’s black market data in January 1916 and July 1916 and assign the remaining part of the total
real return to August 1914. For Czechoslovakia, the April 1943 to May 1945 period corresponds to an
episode that starts with severe trading restrictions and price controls and ends with the permanent stock
exchange closure in Prague on May 5, 1945. For this period, we assign a terminal nominal return of
−90.00% to May 1945 and zero nominal returns to the other months. This treatment of Czechoslovakia’s
multi-month return is consistent with the economic experience of investors over this period, as detailed
in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022).
3

--- PDF PAGE 58 ---
A.3 International stocks
We calculate real returns on a portfolio of international stocks from the perspective of an investor in
a developed country . For each country , the international stock portfolio is a weighted investment across
all developed stock markets excluding the local stock market. The international stock portfolio is value
weighted by total market capitalization, and the returns are expressed in the domestic currency such
that they reflect the exchange rate risk incurred by investing in assets denominated in foreign currencies.
The return calculation for international stocks uses the gross nominal stock market returns described
in Section A.2. We convert the nominal return for each country j ̸= i into a real return denominated in
the domestic currency of country i and calculate the weighted average across countries j ̸= i,
RInternational stocks
i,t =
X
j̸=i
w j,t−1
RNominal stocks
j,t
Πi,t

E i, j
t
E i, j
t−1

, (A5)
where E i, j
t is the exchange rate at the end of month t expressed in country i’s currency per country j’s
currency ,w j,t−1 is country j’s weight in the international stock portfolio in montht,
w j,t−1 =
M j,t−1P
j̸=i M j,t−1
, (A6)
and M j,t−1 is the total market capitalization for the stock market in country j at the end of month t − 1
expressed in USD.
A.4 Bonds
We calculate bond returns using monthly data on bond yields. For comparability across countries
and periods, we focus on ten-year government bonds. The GFDatabase has variables for ten-year bond
yields for most countries and periods in our sample, and we supplement these data to achieve full data
coverage.
We first estimate ten-year bond prices given bond yields. We assume that each bond has exactly ten
years to maturity , semiannual coupons, and a coupon rate equal to the greater of the bond yield and
zero at the end of month t − 1. We then reprice the bond at the end of month t given the month-t yield
and the one month shorter maturity . We calculate the gross nominal return,
RNominal bonds
i,t =
Pi,t
Pi,t−1
, (A7)
where Pi,t is the calculated dirty bond price (i.e., inclusive of accrued interest) for country i at the end
of month t. Finally , we calculate the gross real bond return,
RBonds
i,t =
RNominal bonds
i,t
Πi,t
. (A8)
The return calculation requires assumptions about the maturity and the coupon rate of the underlying
bond. We validate this calculation in Section A.7 by comparing our calculated returns with returns from
Datastream over the period of overlap between the two data samples. Our return calculations are highly
correlated with and have similar moments to those from Datastream.
Sections A.4.1 to A.4.7 describe several issues related to the underlying bond yield data.
4

--- PDF PAGE 59 ---
A.4.1 Bond data availability
For several countries in our sample, there are no ten-year government bonds in circulation at the
time the country is initially classified as developed. For example, ten-year government bonds are first
issued in Iceland in 1992, Singapore in 1998, Hungary in 1999, Poland in 1999, the Czech Republic
in 2000, South Korea in 2000 [Kang, Kim, and Rhee (2005) ], Mexico in 2001 [Jeanneau and Verdia
(2005)], and Türkiye in 2010.34 These circumstances create gaps between the development dates and
the sample eligibility dates for these countries.
Estonia issued its only domestic bond in 1993, and all tranches were redeemed by 2004. 35 As a
result, Estonia is excluded from our sample because the country has no domestic bond data for the
developed period.
A.4.2 Data gaps and errors
Table A.IV shows periods over which we are missing monthly bond yields. In these cases, we use
a smoothing procedure to fill gaps in the monthly bond return series. The procedure uses the country-
level yield data from before and after the missing observations to produce a series of constant monthly
returns across a given period.
Because there are no data from GFD or alternative sources, we use the last non-missing yield of
4.33% in June 1944 to fill the data gap in bond yield data for Czechoslovakia from July 1944 to May
1945.
We adjust an apparent error in the GFD bond yield data for Switzerland. The source for the GFD data
is the Swiss National Bank. In comparing the GFD data to the Swiss National Bank data, however, the
yields match only through December 1941. The Swiss National Bank reports yields of 3.11% in January
1942, 3.14% in February 1942, 3.12% in March 1942, and 3.08% in April 1942. GFD reports yields
of 3.14%, 3.12%, and 3.07% for January through March 1942. From April 1942 to December 1990,
the GFD data lead the Swiss National Bank data by one month. We adjust the GFD data by entering a
3.11% yield for January 1942 and shifting the original GFD data from January 1942 to November 1990
so that it covers February 1942 to December 1990.
A.4.3 Merging multiple sources
As shown in Table A.II, constructing a series of bond returns for a given country often requires us to
combine yield data from multiple sources. We make additional adjustments in linking the data series
for several sample countries. The GFD data for Chile end in March 2015, and we use data from Federal
Reserve Economic Data (FRED) from April 2015 to December 2023. GFD reports a yield of 2.23%
for March 2015, whereas the yields from FRED are 4.34% for March 2015 and 4.49% for April 2015.
Merging these data series without adjustment would result in a return calculation of−17.76% for April
2015. This return likely provides a poor characterization of investment outcomes, given the relative
stability in yields in the FRED data. To address this issue, we use March 2015 and April 2015 yields
from FRED to compute the April 2015 bond return. We make an analogous adjustment for Iceland
34See http://www.lanamal.is/asset/12732/special-report-markadsvidskipti_agust-2019.pdf for Ice-
land, https://eservices.mas.gov.sg/statistics/fdanet/BenchmarkPricesAndYields.aspx for Singapore,
https://stats.oecd.org/OECDStat_Metadata/ShowMetadata.ashx?Dataset=GOV_DEBT&Coords=%5BCOU%5D.
%5BHUN%5D&ShowOnWeb=true&Lang=en for Hungary , https://www.gov.pl/web/finance/transaction-database
for Poland, https://www.cnb.cz/en/financial-markets/treasury-securities-market/government-bonds/ for the
Czech Republic, and https://www.tcmb.gov.tr/wps/wcm/connect/EN/TCMB+EN/Main+Menu/Statistics/Markets+
Data/Treasury+Auction/ for Türkiye.
35See https://www.rahandusministeerium.ee/en/objectivesactivities/state-treasury/financial-
reserves-and-liabilities/debt-management .
5

--- PDF PAGE 60 ---
in March 2004, as well as for Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Türkiye in the
corresponding months of 2023 when we merge data from GFD and FRED.
A.4.4 Alternative bond return calculations
Our primary bond return calculations use yield data with an assumption that the coupon rate is
equal to the bond yield for a hypothetical new ten-year bond. In the cases described below, we use
an alternative approach of separately measuring the capital gain and the coupon income due to data
availability . We use data on current yields and coupon rates from the Central Bank of Argentina to infer
bond prices for each month end from January 1947 to December 1966. We compute the capital gain
based on the change in bond price and add one month of coupon income based on the 3% coupon
rate from February 1947 to July 1960 and the 8% coupon rate from August 1960 to December 1966.
We use London quotes from the International Center for Finance at Yale for Chile (December 1926 to
September 1929) and Czechoslovakia (April 1922 to January 1927). We compute monthly bond returns
based on price changes and monthly coupon income at the coupon rate of 4.5% for Chile and 8.0% for
Czechoslovakia. Similarly , we compute monthly bond returns based on price changes and monthly
coupon income at the coupon rate of 4% for Chile from April 1965 to December 1970. We use bond
price data from the Central Bank of Chile over this period.
A.4.5 Bond conversion in Argentina
Argentina issued a 3% bond in 1955. In August 1960, the government allowed for a voluntary
conversion of these old bonds to new 8% bonds. The conversion was favorable for bondholders, as
they could receive bonds with higher interest payments. According to Duggan (1963), the 3% bonds
were exchanged at 79 pesos for the nominal value of 100 pesos. Because the terms of the conversion
were favorable, the majority of existing bondholders took the offer. In constructing our bond series for
Argentina, we assume conversion at the 79:100 rate. We compute the price change and multiply by
0.79 to reflect the conversion when computing the capital gain for August 1960, and we add one month
of coupon income at the 8% coupon rate to calculate the return.
A.4.6 Bond default in Greece
The bond return calculation must be adjusted in the event of a default or bond exchange that pro-
duces a change in par value. Defaults on domestic sovereign bonds are rare relative to external defaults,
particularly for developed countries[Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)]. Rather, inflation is a more commonly
used tool for eroding the real value of debt.
A notable event that produced a change in par value is the Greek default in 2012. Greece undertook
a debt exchange in March 2012 in which creditors exchanged their existing bonds for a package of new
government securities with a lower face value. Zettelmeyer, Trebesch, and Gulati (2013) provide an
issue-by-issue estimate of the haircut for existing bondholders. We use the 53.8% haircut estimate for
the bond with maturity closest to ten years. The ten-year bond yield declined substantially from 36.6%
to 21.0% in March 2012, such that our calculation based on bond yields produces a nominal net return of
67.1%. Our calculation of the nominal gross return that incorporates the haircut is 1.671×(1−0.538) =
0.772 to produce a nominal net return of −22.8% for ten-year bonds in March 2012.
A.4.7 Germany in 1919 to 1924 and 1948
To maintain consistency with our treatment of stock returns in Germany in the inflationary period
from 1917 to 1923, we also compute bond returns in gold marks. We use bond prices in paper marks
6

--- PDF PAGE 61 ---
from Fischer (1923, 1924, 1925) and convert paper mark prices to gold marks by using the USD
exchange rate because the United States was on the gold standard during that period. The change
in gold mark bond prices provides an estimate of the capital appreciation of the bonds. We compute the
total bond return by including interest payments based on the 3% coupon rate of the bonds. We use
this approach from February 1919 to January 1924.
Germany exchanged Reichsmarks for Deutschemarks in June 1948. For government bonds, the
exchange was 10:1 [Schnabl (2019) ]. To reflect the economic value of the currency exchange, we
adjust the bond price at the end of June 1948 by dividing the price of the bond by ten. The resulting
nominal bond return in June 1948 is −90.0%.
A.5 Bills
We estimate returns on bills using short-term yields and rates. For most countries and periods, the
GFDatabase has coverage with yield data on short-term (typically three-month) government bills. When
these data are missing, we next use central bank rates when available and then interbank rates from
the GFDatabase. We supplement these data with hand-collected, short-term rates from original source
documents to achieve full coverage. We convert annual nominal rates on bills into monthly nominal
returns denoted by RNominal bills
i,t and then calculate real returns,
RBills
i,t =
RNominal bills
i,t
Πi,t
. (A9)
We compute monthly nominal bill returns from annual yields or rates as
RNominal bills
i,t = (1 + RAnnual rate
i,t−1 )1/12, (A10)
where RAnnual rate
i,t−1 is the annualized short-term government bill yield, central bank rate, or interbank rate
reported at the end of month t − 1.
A.5.1 Data issues related to bills
We have a few periods over which there are no bill data from GFD or alternative sources, and we are
required to make assumptions to fill these gaps in the data. For Canada, we use a yield of 5.75% for the
seven-month period from January 1914 to July 1914. This value is an average of the 6.50% interbank
rate for December 1913 from GFD and the 5.00% advance rate for August 1914 from Shearer and Clark
(1984). The Netherlands is missing data for February 2014, so we average the short-term government
bill yields from GFD of 0.09% for January 2014 and 0.13% for March 2014.
For New Zealand from January 1896 to December 1914, we use short-term yields on bills held by the
Post Office Savings Bank Fund. The Post Office Savings Bank Fund did not hold Treasury bills in 1913,
so we are missing data for that year. The yields are 3.00% in December 1912 and 4.00% in January
1914, and we use the average of 3.50% to fill in the data gap. We are also missing yield data for New
Zealand from January 1915 to December 1919. The yields for December 1914 and January 1920 are
both 4.00%, so we assume a 4.00% yield over the adjoining period with missing data.
A.6 Other variables
We follow the data adjustments noted in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) and the
corresponding internet appendix to estimate country-level inflation and exchange rate changes.
7

--- PDF PAGE 62 ---
The data for market capitalization are from GFD. These series are typically reported at an annual
frequency . There are missing data for some country-year observations of these series. For market cap-
italization, which is reported in USD, we fill data gaps by interpolating changes in proportion to USD
nominal stock index returns. We use market capitalization series for Germany from 1917 to 1923 that
are denominated in gold marks rather than paper marks. This approach is consistent with the calcula-
tion of the total return index for domestic stocks for Germany over this period. We fill a data gap in the
2023 GFD market capitalization data for the UK using an alternative source.36
Table A.V shows dividend-price ratio data for each country in the sample. We use annual dividend-
price ratio data. We rely on external sources to calculate dividend-price ratios for Slovakia and Latvia.
In both cases, GFD lacks comprehensive information to compute these ratios. For Slovakia, we use
dividend-price ratio data from the Bratislava Stock Exchange’s official website.37 For Latvia, we calculate
dividend-price ratios using data on total dividends paid by companies from Nasdaq Baltic and data on
total market capitalization from GFD. 38 We use dividend-price ratios from Jordà, Knoll, Kuvshinov,
Schularick, and Taylor (2019) for Portugal from 1934 to 1987.
We follow Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) to fill the data gaps in GFD dividend-
price ratio data for Chile from January 1967 to December 1970 and Czechoslovakia from April 1938 to
March 1943. For Chile, we fill the data gap with a 7.0% yield based on the dividend yield observation in
December 1966. The dividend yield in Czechoslovakia fluctuates between 1.4% and 2.6% in the three
years before the break in the data, so we assume a 2.0% dividend yield for the missing observations.
Table A.VI shows additional periods over which annual dividend-price ratio data are missing in the
GFDatabase. We estimate dividend-price ratios for these periods with missing data using the methods
described in the table.
A.7 External validation tests
This section details the external validation tests for our stock and bond return data.
A.7.1 Comparison of stock data from GFD and Jordà et al. (2019)
Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022) compare their data on stock returns from GFD with
the stock returns from the overlapping periods in Jordà, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and Taylor (2019).
They find that the country-level samples from these two sources have very similar average returns,
standard deviations, and extreme returns. They also show that the return correlation across the two
sources exceeds 0.90 for nearly all countries. Given that our approach to constructing country-level
stock returns closely follows the approach in Anarkulova, Cederburg, and O’Doherty (2022), these tests
also provide external validation of our stock data.
A.7.2 Comparison of bond data from GFD and Datastream
As described in Section A.4, we calculate bond returns using bond yield data from GFD and other
sources. In this section, we perform an external validation exercise by comparing our bond returns with
those from Datastream over the periods and countries for which they are available. The analysis serves
both to ensure that our approach to converting bond yields to returns is empirically accurate and to
assess whether our bond return data and the bond return data from a popular alternative source exhibit
common characteristics.
36The data are available at https://www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/united-kingdom/market-capitalization.
37See http://www.bsse.sk/%C5%A0tatistika/Mesa%C4%8Dn%C3%A1.aspx.
38The dividend data for Latvia are available at https://nasdaqbaltic.com/statistics/en/statistics.
8

--- PDF PAGE 63 ---
Table A.VII shows results from the external validation analysis. The table reports statistics for real
returns. Our sample overlaps with Datastream for 27 countries. Datastream data begin in 1989 for sev-
eral countries and more recently for others. The table reports the sample size, the arithmetic and geo-
metric means, standard deviation, and minimum and maximum returns for our data, the corresponding
statistics for Datastream data, and the correlation between our returns and those from Datastream.
Table A.VII indicates a close correspondence between our bond return data and those from Datas-
tream. For nearly all countries, the means, standard deviations, and extreme returns are highly similar
across the two data sources. The return correlations are above 0.90 for 24 of the 27 countries. Only
Hungary , Mexico, and Singapore have correlations below 0.90. Of the 24 countries with high correla-
tions, Greece is unique in Table A.VII as the only country with economically significant differences in
the remaining summary statistics. We proceed to discuss these four exceptions.
Hungary and Singapore appear to be the simplest cases. We examine bond yields and returns across
the two datasets. The GFDatabase and Datastream bond yields differ, sometimes substantially , for these
two countries. To reconcile the differences, we collect ten-year historical bond yield data from the
Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of Hungary) and the Monetary Authority of Singapore. 39 For
Hungary , the correlation in yield changes from the central bank data and our data is near one, whereas
the correlation between yield changes from the central bank and Datastream is much lower. For Singa-
pore, the GFDatabase and Singaporean government data exactly match. The large deviations between
Datastream and these other sources primarily occur in the first seven months of the sample, and the
reported returns in Datastream imply changes in yields that are not reflected in the data from the Mon-
etary Authority . Excluding the first seven months, the correlation between returns in our data and
Datastream is 0.98. Our data appear reliable for these countries.
The bond yields for Mexico in our data and in Datastream are relatively similar. For several months
in the sample, the reported Datastream return seems inconsistent with the reported yield change. For
example, the reported yield increases by 0.08% in June 2015, but the reported return is 8.12%. We
compare our calculated returns and the reported Datastream returns with the returns on the S&P/BMV
Mexico Sovereign Bond Index in these months.40 The S&P/BMV index tracks bonds with several matu-
rities, and its duration is low compared with the other two series. Nonetheless, the returns from this
index are much more consistent with our data versus Datastream. In June 2015, for example, the
S&P/BMV index reports a return of −0.15%, which is close to our return calculation of −0.10% but
far from the 8.12% reported return in Datastream. Given the consistency between the GFDatabase and
the S&P/BMV index, the deviations between our data and Datastream appear to be reporting errors for
returns in Datastream.
The largest deviations in bond returns for Greece are related to the Greek bond default in 2012.
As discussed in Section A.4.6, we calculate a bond return in March 2012 that accounts for the bond
exchange and the associated haircut. Our return calculation, which reflects information from ten-
year bond yields and the default, is −22.80% in this month. This return differs substantially from the
−4.16% return reported by Datastream. Our study focuses on domestic debt, so we take the perspective
of a hypothetical domestic investor. Participation rates in the exchange were higher among domestic
investors compared with international investors [Zettelmeyer, Trebesch, and Gulati (2013)]. We do not
have information on Datastream’s return calculation for this month, but the difference could arise from
a different assumption about participation in the exchange. Late in 2012, Greece announced a voluntary
bond buyback to be executed in December 2012, and the buyback led to an increase in market prices
[Zettelmeyer, Trebesch, and Gulati (2013)]. We observe a 4.32% decrease in bond yield in December
39See https://www.mnb.hu/en/statistics/statistical-data-and-information/statistical-time-
series/xi-money-and-capital-markets and https://eservices.mas.gov.sg/statistics/fdanet/
BenchmarkPricesAndYields.aspx.
40See https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/indices/fixed-income/sp-bmv-mexico-sovereign-bond-index/ .
9

--- PDF PAGE 64 ---
2012 and calculate a return of 26.12%. Datastream reports a 3.21% decrease in bond yield and reports
a return of 41.47%, such that the return is much larger than that implied by the yield change. Given
that the buyback occurred at prevailing market prices, our view is that any effect of the buyback should
be reflected in the change in yields. The return differences for these two months account for much of
the difference in average returns for Greece in Table A.VII.
10

--- PDF PAGE 65 ---
Table A.I: Developed country sample periods
The table shows developed countries, initial development dates, classification reasons for development, sample eligibility details, and sample coverage. The
development year classifications are based on agricultural labor share or organizational membership in the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation
(OEEC) or the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Sample eligibility for a given developed country requires that the country
has issued long-term government bonds. The sample period start date is the later of the sample eligibility date and the first date with return data for stocks,
bonds, and bills.
Development details Sample eligibility details Sample coverage
Country Year Reason for classification Year Reason for delayed sample eligibility Start date End date Coverage (%)
United Kingdom 1841 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1890:01 2023:12 100.0
Netherlands 1849 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1914:01 2023:12 82.1
Belgium 1856 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1897:01 2023:12 94.8
France 1866 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1890:01 2023:12 100.0
Norway 1875 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1914:01 2023:12 82.1
Germany 1882 Agricultural labor share 1890 Sample for study starts in 1890 1890:01 2023:12 100.0
Denmark 1890 Agricultural labor share 1890 n/a 1890:01 2023:12 100.0
Switzerland 1890 Agricultural labor share 1890 n/a 1914:01 2023:12 82.1
United States 1890 Agricultural labor share 1890 n/a 1890:01 2023:12 100.0
Canada 1891 Agricultural labor share 1891 n/a 1891:01 2023:12 100.0
Argentina 1895 Agricultural labor share 1895 n/a 1947:02 1966:12 27.7
New Zealand 1896 Agricultural labor share 1896 n/a 1896:01 2023:12 100.0
Australia 1901 Agricultural labor share 1901 n/a 1901:01 2023:12 100.0
Sweden 1910 Agricultural labor share 1910 n/a 1910:01 2023:12 100.0
Austria 1920 Agricultural labor share 1920 n/a 1920:01 2023:12 100.0
Chile period I 1920 Agricultural labor share 1920 n/a 1927:01 1970:12 86.3
Greece 1920 Agricultural labor share 1920 n/a 1981:02 2023:12 41.3
Czechoslovakia 1921 Agricultural labor share 1921 n/a 1922:05 1945:05 94.5
Japan 1930 Agricultural labor share 1930 n/a 1930:01 2023:12 100.0
Portugal 1930 Agricultural labor share 1930 n/a 1934:01 2023:12 95.7
Italy 1931 Agricultural labor share 1931 n/a 1931:01 2023:12 100.0
Ireland 1936 Agricultural labor share 1936 n/a 1936:01 2023:12 100.0
Singapore 1947 Agricultural labor share 1998 Long-term bonds first available in 1998 1998:07 2023:12 100.0
Iceland 1948 OEEC membership 1992 Long-term bonds first available in 1992 2002:01 2023:12 68.8
Luxembourg 1948 OEEC membership 1948 n/a 1982:01 2023:12 55.3
Türkiye 1948 OEEC membership 2010 Long-term bonds first available in 2010 2010:02 2023:12 100.0
(Continued on next page)
11

--- PDF PAGE 66 ---
T able A.I (Continued)
Development details Sample eligibility details Sample coverage
Country Year Reason for classification Year Reason for delayed sample eligibility Start date End date Coverage (%)
Spain 1959 OEEC membership 1959 n/a 1959:01 2023:12 100.0
Finland 1969 OECD membership 1969 n/a 1969:01 2023:12 100.0
Mexico 1994 OECD membership 2001 Long-term bonds first available in 2001 2001:08 2023:12 100.0
Czech Republic 1995 OECD membership 2000 Long-term bonds first available in 2000 2000:05 2023:12 100.0
Hungary 1996 OECD membership 1999 Long-term bonds first available in 1999 1999:02 2023:12 100.0
Poland 1996 OECD membership 1999 Long-term bonds first available in 1999 1999:06 2023:12 100.0
South Korea 1996 OECD membership 2000 Long-term bonds first available in 2000 2000:11 2023:12 100.0
Slovakia 2000 OECD membership 2000 n/a 2000:01 2023:12 100.0
Chile period II 2010 OECD membership 2010 n/a 2010:01 2023:12 100.0
Estonia 2010 OECD membership — No qualifying long-term bonds — — —
Israel 2010 OECD membership 2010 n/a 2010:01 2023:12 100.0
Slovenia 2010 OECD membership 2010 n/a 2010:01 2023:12 100.0
Latvia 2016 OECD membership 2016 n/a 2016:01 2023:12 100.0
Lithuania 2018 OECD membership 2018 n/a 2018:01 2023:12 100.0
Colombia 2020 OECD membership 2020 n/a 2020:01 2023:12 100.0
12

--- PDF PAGE 67 ---
Table A.II: Data sources
The table summarizes the data series used to compute returns for each developed country in the sample. For each country and asset class, the table reports the
data series used to construct returns and the corresponding start and end dates. The data series symbols correspond to those in the GFDatabase from Global
Financial Data. For stocks and bills, the table also indicates the data series type. Stock returns are based on either total return indexes (TRI) or combinations
of price indexes and dividend-price ratios (PI /DP). Bill returns are based on short-term Treasury yields (TBY), central bank interest rates (CBR), interbank
interest rates (IIR), one-year government bond yields (GBY-1), deposit interest rates (DIR), interest rates on advances (IRA), overnight interest rates (OIR),
or time money rates (TMR). All bond returns correspond to returns on ten-year government bonds. We provide details on alternative data sources in the
footnotes.
Stocks Bonds Bills
Country Series Type Start End Series Start End Series Type Start End
Argentina _IBGD, SYARGYM PI/DP 1947:02 1966:12 ➌ 1947:02 1966:12 IDARGD CBR 1947:02 1966:12
Australia _AORDAD TRI 1901:01 2023:12 IGAUS10D 1901:01 2023:12 ➋ TBY 1901:01 1920:06
IDAUSD CBR 1920:07 1928:06
ITAUS3D TBY 1928:07 2023:12
Austria _ATXTRD TRI 1920:01 2023:12 IGAUT10D 1920:01 2023:12 IDAUTD CBR 1920:01 1959:12
ITAUT3M TBY 1960:01 1990:12
IGAUT1D GBY-1 1991:01 2023:12
Belgium _BCSHD TRI 1897:01 2023:12 IGBEL10D 1897:01 2023:12 IDBELD CBR 1897:01 1947:12
ITBEL3D TBY 1948:01 2023:12
Canada _TRGSPTSE TRI 1891:01 2023:12 IGCAN10D 1891:01 2023:12 ✚ DIR 1891:01 1901:12
IMCANMOM OIR 1902:01 1913:12
✲ IRA 1914:08 1934:02
ITCAN3D TBY 1934:03 2023:12
Chile period I _IGPAD, SYCHLYM PI/DP 1927:01 1970:12 ➍ 1927:01 1929:09 IDCHLD CBR 1927:01 1970:12
➎ 1929:10 1930:12
IGCHLCM 1931:01 1956:02
➏ 1956:03 1970:12
Chile period II _IPSAD TRI 2010:01 2023:12 IGCHLIM 2010:01 2015:03 ITCHL3D TBY 2010:01 2012:09
➐ 2015:04 2023:12 IDCHLD CBR 2012:10 2023:12
Colombia TRCOLSTM TRI 2020:01 2023:12 IGCOL10D 2020:01 2023:12 ITCOL3W TBY 2020:01 2023:12
Czech Republic _PXTRD TRI 2000:05 2023:12 IGCZE10D 2000:05 2023:12 ITCZE3D TBY 2000:05 2017:02
IDCZED CBR 2017:03 2023:12
Czechoslovakia CZINDXM, SYCZEYM PI/DP 1922:05 1937:11 ➍ 1922:05 1927:01 IDCZED CBR 1922:05 1945:05
CZINDEXM, SYCZEYM PI/DP 1937:12 1943:03 ➎ 1927:02 1944:06
(Continued on next page)
13

--- PDF PAGE 68 ---
T able A.II (Continued)
Stocks Bonds Bills
Country Series Type Start End Series Start End Series Type Start End
Denmark _OMXCGID TRI 1890:01 2023:12 IGDNK10D 1890:01 2023:12 IDDNKD CBR 1890:01 1975:12
ITDNK3D TBY 1976:01 2023:12
Finland _OMXHGID TRI 1969:01 2023:12 IGFIN10D 1969:01 2023:12 IDFIND CBR 1969:01 1996:08
IGFIN1D GBY-1 1996:09 2012:01
ITFIN1D TBY 2012:02 2013:05
IGFIN1D GBY-1 2013:06 2014:07
IDFIND CBR 2014:08 2023:12
France TRSBF250D TRI 1890:01 2023:12 IGFRA10D 1890:01 2023:12 IDFRAD CBR 1890:01 1930:12
ITFRA3D TBY 1931:01 2023:12
Germany _CDAXD TRI 1890:01 2023:12 IGDEU10D 1890:01 2023:12 IDDEUD CBR 1890:01 1952:12
ITDEU3D TBY 1953:01 2023:12
Greece _RETMD TRI 1981:02 2023:12 IGGRC10D 1981:02 2014:01 ITGRC3D TBY 1981:02 2023:12
➐ 2014:02 2014:02
IGGRC10D 2014:03 2023:12
Hungary _BUXD TRI 1999:02 2023:12 IGHUN10D 1999:02 2023:12 ITHUN3D TBY 1999:02 2023:12
Iceland _OMXIPID, SYISLYM PI/DP 2002:01 2002:06 ➐ 2002:01 2004:02 ITISL3D TBY 2002:01 2013:01
_OMXIGID TRI 2002:07 2023:12 IGISL10D 2004:03 2023:12 IDISLD CBR 2013:02 2023:12
Ireland _IVRTD TRI 1936:01 2023:12 IGIRL10D 1936:01 2023:12 IDIRLD CBR 1936:01 1969:11
ITIRL3M TBY 1969:12 2008:12
➐ IIR 2009:01 2023:12
Israel TRISRSTM TRI 2010:01 2023:12 ➐ 2010:01 2014:12 ITISR3D TBY 2010:01 2023:12
IGISR10IM 2015:01 2023:12
Italy _BCIPRD TRI 1931:01 2019:12 IGITA10D 1931:01 2023:12 IDITAD CBR 1931:01 1939:12
_FTITLMS, SYITAYM PI/DP 2020:01 2023:12 ITITA3D TBY 1940:01 2023:12
Japan _TOPXDVD TRI 1930:01 2023:12 IGJPN10D 1930:01 2023:12 IDJPND CBR 1930:01 1959:12
ITJPN3D TBY 1960:01 2023:12
Latvia _OMXRGID TRI 2016:01 2023:12 ➐ 2016:01 2023:12 ➐ IIR 2016:01 2023:12
Lithuania _OMXVGID TRI 2018:01 2023:12 IGLTU10D 2018:01 2023:01 ➐ IIR 2018:01 2023:12
➐ 2023:02 2023:12
Luxembourg _LUXXD, SYLUXYM PI/DP 1982:01 1984:12 IGLUX10D 1982:01 2023:03 IMLUXM OIR 1982:01 1998:12
_LUXXRD TRI 1985:01 2016:11 ➐ 2023:04 2023:12 ➐ IIR 1999:01 2023:12
➊ TRI 2016:12 2023:12
Mexico _IRTD TRI 2001:08 2023:12 IGMEX10D 2001:08 2023:12 ITMEX3D TBY 2001:08 2023:12
(Continued on next page)
14

--- PDF PAGE 69 ---
T able A.II (Continued)
Stocks Bonds Bills
Country Series Type Start End Series Start End Series Type Start End
Netherlands _AAXGRD TRI 1914:01 2023:12 IGNLD10D 1914:01 1944:08 IDNLDBD CBR 1914:01 1940:12
➋ 1944:09 1945:12 ITNLD3D TBY 1941:01 2023:12
IGNLD10D 1946:01 2023:12
New Zealand _NZGID TRI 1896:01 2023:12 IGNZL10D 1896:01 2023:12 ■ TBY 1896:01 1919:12
■ DIR 1920:01 1922:12
IDNZLD CBR 1923:01 1978:02
ITNZL3D TBY 1978:03 2023:12
Norway _OSEAXD TRI 1914:01 2023:12 IGNOR10D 1914:01 2023:12 IDNORD CBR 1914:01 1941:11
ITNOR3D TBY 1941:12 2023:12
Poland _WIGD TRI 1999:06 2023:12 IGPOL10D 1999:06 2023:03 ITPOL3D TBY 1999:06 2023:12
➐ 2023:04 2023:12
Portugal _IBTAD, ➋ PI/DP 1934:01 1988:01 IGPRT10D 1934:01 1974:04 IDPRTD CBR 1934:01 1988:12
_BVLGD TRI 1988:02 2023:12 ➋ 1974:05 1975:12 ITPRT6D TBY 1989:01 1999:01
IGPRT10D 1976:01 2023:06 IDPRTD CBR 1999:02 2001:12
➐ 2023:07 2023:12 ➋ TBY 2002:01 2010:09
ITPRT6D TBY 2010:10 2022:09
➐ IIR 2022:10 2023:12
Singapore _TFTFSTD TRI 1998:07 2023:12 IGSGP10D 1998:07 2023:12 ITSGP3D TBY 1998:07 2023:12
Slovakia _SAXD TRI 2000:01 2023:12 IGSVK10D 2000:01 2023:03 IDSVKD CBR 2000:01 2008:12
➐ 2023:04 2023:12 ➐ IIR 2009:01 2023:12
Slovenia _SBITOPD, SYSVNYM PI/DP 2010:01 2023:12 ➐ 2010:01 2023:12 ITSVN3M TBY 2010:01 2023:12
South Korea TRKORSTM TRI 2000:11 2023:12 IGKOR10D 2000:11 2023:12 IGKOR1D GBY-1 2000:11 2023:12
Spain _BCNPR30 TRI 1959:01 2023:12 IGESP10D 1959:01 2023:12 IDESPD CBR 1959:01 1978:12
ITESP12D TBY 1979:01 2023:12
Sweden _OMXSBGI TRI 1910:01 2023:12 IGSWE10D 1910:01 2018:12 IDSWED CBR 1910:01 1954:12
➐ 2019:01 2019:01 ITSWE3D TBY 1955:01 2023:12
IGSWE10D 2019:02 2023:12
Switzerland _SSHID TRI 1914:01 2023:12 IGCHE10D 1914:01 1941:12 IDCHED CBR 1914:01 1979:12
➑ 1942:01 1942:01 ITCHE3D TBY 1980:01 2023:12
IGCHE10D 1942:02 2023:12
Türkiye TRRBILED TRI 2010:02 2023:12 IGTUR10D 2010:02 2023:06 ITTUR3D TBY 2010:02 2014:09
➒ 2023:07 2023:12 IGTUR1D GBY-1 2014:10 2023:03
➓ TBY 2023:04 2023:12
(Continued on next page)
15

--- PDF PAGE 70 ---
T able A.II (Continued)
Stocks Bonds Bills
Country Series Type Start End Series Start End Series Type Start End
United Kingdom _TFTASD TRI 1890:01 2023:12 IGGBR10D 1890:01 2023:12 IDGBRD CBR 1890:01 1899:12
ITGBR3D TBY 1900:01 2023:12
United States _SPXTRD TRI 1890:01 2023:12 IGUSA10D 1890:01 2023:12 ▲ TMR 1890:01 1914:10
IDUSAD CBR 1914:11 1919:12
ITUSA3CMD TBY 1920:01 2023:12
Footnotes:
➊ Stock returns for Luxembourg for the period from 2016:12 to 2023:12 are from the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. See
https://www.bourse.lu/home.
➋ Dividend-price ratios, bond returns, and bill returns for several countries are from Jordà, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick, and Taylor (2019).
➌ Bond returns for Argentina for the period from 1947:02 to 1966:12 are based on data from the Central Bank of Argentina. See
http://www.bcra.gov.ar/PublicacionesEstadisticas/Boletin_estadistico.asp.
➍ Bond returns for select periods in Chile and Czechoslovakia are based on London quotes from the International Center for Finance at Yale. See
https://som.yale.edu/faculty-research/our-centers-initiatives/international-center-finance/data/historical-financial-
research-data/london-stock-exchange .
➎ Bond returns for select periods in Chile and Czechoslovakia are based on London quotes from the League of Nations reports.
➏ Bond returns for Chile for the period from 1956:03 to 1970:12 are based on data from the Central Bank of Chile. See
https://repositoriodigital.bcentral.cl/xmlui/handle/20.500.12580/26/browse?type=dateissued.
➐ Bond and bill returns for several countries are based on data from Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) at the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis. See https://fred.stlouisfed.org/.
➑ The bond return in Switzerland for 1942:01 is based on data from the Swiss National Bank
(https://www.snb.ch/de/iabout/stat/statrep/statpubdis/id/statpub_histz_arch#t2). We also shift a portion of the series IGCHE10D
from GFD, which originally covers the period from 1942:01 to 1990:11, to cover the period from 1942:02 to 1990:12.
➒ Bond returns in Türkiye for the period from 2023:07 to 2023:12 are based on data from
http://www.worldgovernmentbonds.com/bond-historical-data/turkey/10-years/ .
➓ Bill returns for Türkiye for the period from 2023:04 to 2023:12 are based on data from
https://www.worldgovernmentbonds.com/bond-historical-data/turkey/3-months/ .
✚ Bill returns for Canada for the period from 1891:01 to 1901:12 are based on interest rates on deposits in government savings banks. See p. 363 of
https://www66.statcan.gc.ca/eng/1901-eng.htm.
✲ Bill returns for Canada for the period from 1914:08 to 1934:02 are based on data from Shearer and Clark (1984).
■ Bill returns for New Zealand for the period from 1896:01 to 1922:12 are based on data from the annual New Zealand Official Year-book. See, e.g.,
https://www3.stats.govt.nz/New_Zealand_Official_Yearbooks/1896/NZOYB_1896.html.
▲ Bill returns for the United States for the period from 1890:01 to 1914:10 are based on data from Macaulay (1938).
16

--- PDF PAGE 71 ---
Table A.III: Multi-month stock returns
The table reports periods of multi-month stock returns associated with exchange closures and details our approach
to converting each return to a series of monthly returns. For each multi-month return observation, the table
reports the number of months, the start and end dates of the period, the nominal and real net stock market
returns earned over the period, and the adjustment method. For adjustment method 1, we use alternative data
sources from GFD (e.g., black market trading data) to fill in a complete series of monthly returns. For adjustment
method 2, we assign the full multi-month real return to the first month of the period and assign zero real returns
to the remaining months. The cases marked with a ✚ are discussed in Section A.2.1. Panels A and B show events
corresponding to World War I and World War II, respectively , Panel C shows periods with revolutions, Panel D
shows financial and banking crises, and Panel E shows labor strikes.
Nominal Real
Country Months Start date End date return (%) return (%) Adjustment
Panel A: World War I
Australia 6 1914:08 1915:01 −0.45 −0.39 Method 1
Belgium 52 1914:08 1918:11 25.12 −55.91 Method 2
Canada 7 1914:08 1915:02 1.38 −3.59 Method 1
Denmark 4 1914:08 1914:11 0.72 −0.27 Method 1
France 6 1914:08 1915:01 −10.89 −27.54 Method 1
Germany 42 1914:08 1918:01 20.03 −38.87 Method 1
Netherlands 7 1914:08 1915:02 −1.23 −3.50 Method 1
Norway 3 1914:08 1914:10 −3.80 −4.36 Method 2
Sweden 4 1914:08 1914:11 −5.91 −8.96 Method 2
Switzerland 24 1914:08 1916:07 0.17 −18.71 ✚
United Kingdom 6 1914:08 1915:01 0.11 −2.94 Method 1
United States 5 1914:08 1914:12 −2.14 −3.11 Method 1
Panel B: World War II
Austria 2 1938:04 1938:05 6.01 5.64 Method 2
Austria 113 1939:07 1948:11 315.61 −16.90 ✚
Belgium 5 1940:06 1940:10 22.38 12.54 Method 2
Belgium 11 1944:08 1945:06 −0.29 −17.08 Method 2
Czechoslovakia 16 1938:10 1940:01 32.23 16.91 Method 2
Czechoslovakia 4 1942:01 1942:04 20.66 12.32 Method 2
Denmark 2 1940:05 1940:06 −7.64 −10.67 Method 2
France 2 1939:09 1939:10 −2.96 0.53 Method 1
France 10 1940:06 1941:03 94.57 75.61 Method 2
Germany 67 1943:01 1948:07 −87.62 −91.10 Method 2
Japan 45 1945:09 1949:05 449.38 −87.15 Method 1
Netherlands 5 1940:05 1940:09 20.63 15.21 Method 2
Netherlands 21 1944:09 1946:05 −14.33 −33.15 Method 2
Norway 2 1940:04 1940:05 −2.07 −3.52 Method 1
Switzerland 2 1940:06 1940:07 −3.57 −5.11 Method 1
Panel C: Revolution
Czechoslovakia 26 1943:04 1945:05 −90.00 −88.59 ✚
Portugal 35 1974:05 1977:03 −80.40 −89.24 Method 2
(Continued on next page)
17

--- PDF PAGE 72 ---
T able A.III (Continued)
Nominal Real
Country Months Start date End date return (%) return (%) Adjustment
Panel D: Financial or banking crisis
Austria 2 1931:10 1931:11 6.25 5.60 Method 2
Germany 2 1931:08 1931:09 −24.58 −23.01 Method 2
Germany 7 1931:10 1932:04 −8.22 1.78 Method 2
Greece 2 2015:07 2015:08 −21.53 −20.13 Method 2
Panel E: Labor strike
France 2 1974:04 1974:05 −6.17 −8.76 Method 1
France 2 1979:03 1979:04 12.79 10.69 Method 1
Table A.IV: Bond return smoothing
The table summarizes periods over which we are missing bond yield data. In each case, we use the country-level
yield data from before and after the missing observations to produce a series of constant monthly returns across
the period noted in the table. For each period with missing bond data, the table reports the country , the number
of missing observations, and the start and end dates of the period.
Country Months Start date End date
Argentina 4 1948:08 1948:11
11 1949:01 1949:11
11 1950:01 1950:11
11 1951:01 1951:11
11 1952:01 1952:11
11 1953:01 1953:11
11 1954:01 1954:11
24 1955:01 1956:12
1 1958:02 1958:02
1 1958:08 1958:08
1 1959:05 1959:05
1 1959:08 1959:08
Belgium 3 1940:05 1940:07
Czechoslovakia 15 1938:10 1939:12
Finland 1 1991:06 1991:06
Germany 8 1931:08 1932:03
25 1943:12 1945:12
Greece 44 1989:01 1992:08
Netherlands 2 1940:05 1940:06
3 1944:09 1944:11
11 1945:01 1945:11
Portugal 7 1974:05 1974:11
11 1975:01 1975:11
1 2014:02 2014:02
Switzerland 5 1914:08 1914:12
18

--- PDF PAGE 73 ---
Table A.V: Dividend-price ratio data
The table shows dividend-price ratio data for each country in the sample. The data are annual, and the data series
symbols correspond to those in the GFDatabase from Global Financial Data. We provide details on alternative
sources in Section A.6.
Country Series Start year End year
Argentina SYARGYM 1947 1966
Australia SYAUSYM 1901 2023
Austria SYAUTYM 1920 2023
Belgium SYBELYM 1897 2023
Canada SYCANYTM 1891 2023
Chile period I SYCHLYM 1927 1970
Chile period II SYCHLYM 2010 2023
Colombia SYCOLYM 2020 2023
Czech Republic SYCZEYM 2000 2023
Czechoslovakia SYCZEYM 1922 1945
Denmark SYDNKYM 1890 2023
Finland SYFINYM 1969 2023
France SYFRAYM 1890 2023
Germany SYDEUYM 1890 2023
Greece SYGRCYM 1981 2023
Hungary SYHUNYM 1999 2023
Iceland SYISLYM 2002 2023
Ireland SYIRLYM 1936 2023
Israel SYISRYM 2010 2023
Italy SYITAYM 1931 2023
Japan SYJPNYM 1930 2023
Latvia See table caption 2016 2023
Lithuania SYLTUYM 2018 2023
Luxembourg SYLUXYM 1982 2023
Mexico SYMEXYM 2001 2023
Netherlands SYNLDYAM 1914 2023
New Zealand SYNZLYM 1896 2023
Norway SYNORYM 1914 2023
Poland SYPOLYM 1999 2023
Portugal See table caption 1934 1987
SYPRTYM 1988 2023
Singapore SYSGPYM 1998 2023
Slovakia See table caption 2000 2023
Slovenia SYSVNYM 2010 2023
South Korea SYKORYM 2000 2023
Spain SYESPYM 1959 2023
Sweden SYSWEYM 1910 2023
Switzerland SYCHEYM 1914 2023
Türkiye SYTURYM 2010 2023
United Kingdom _DFTASD 1890 2023
United States SYUSAYM 1890 2023
19

--- PDF PAGE 74 ---
Table A.VI: Data gaps for dividend-price ratios
The table shows periods over which we are missing annual dividend-price ratio data. For each period, the table
reports the country , the number of missing annual observations, the start and end dates for the period, and the
method used to estimate the missing ratios. For estimation method 1, we infer annual dividend-price ratios using
total return index and price index data. For estimation method 2, we fill in missing dividend-price ratios using
the last non-missing dividend-price ratio. For estimation method 3, we use the next year’s dividend-price ratio.
Country Years Start year End year Method
Denmark 31 1938 1968 Method 1
France 1 1940 1940 Method 2
Germany 7 1944 1950 Method 2
Iceland 1 2001 2001 Method 3
17 2007 2023 Method 1
Italy 1 1945 1945 Method 1
Japan 4 1945 1948 Method 2
Luxembourg 1 1981 1981 Method 3
29 1995 2023 Method 1
Mexico 1 2014 2014 Method 1
Singapore 1 2021 2021 Method 1
Switzerland 4 1914 1917 Method 2
20

--- PDF PAGE 75 ---
Table A.VII: External validation test results
The table reports summary statistics for monthly real net bond returns for each developed country with a return sample that overlaps with the sample from
Datastream. For each country , the table shows the number of sample months. The table also shows the following summary statistics for our sample and for
the Datastream sample: the arithmetic average return ( ¯Ra), the geometric average return ( ¯R g), the standard deviation of return (SD), the minimum (Min)
and the maximum (Max) return, and the correlation between the return samples (Corr).
Our data Datastream
Country Months ¯Ra (%) ¯R g (%) SD (%) Min (%) Max (%) ¯Ra (%) ¯R g (%) SD (%) Min (%) Max (%) Corr
Australia 420 0.39 0.36 2.19 −5.63 6.80 0.40 0.38 2.22 −6.75 7.84 0.97
Austria 420 0.21 0.19 1.85 −7.31 5.99 0.26 0.25 1.67 −7.10 4.99 0.96
Belgium 414 0.27 0.25 1.94 −6.49 7.47 0.33 0.31 1.92 −7.48 8.33 0.98
Canada 420 0.33 0.31 2.02 −6.33 6.47 0.34 0.32 1.99 −6.11 6.36 0.97
Czech Republic 284 0.11 0.08 2.45 −8.47 9.62 0.17 0.15 2.35 −8.49 8.76 0.94
Denmark 419 0.31 0.29 2.11 −7.05 6.40 0.34 0.32 2.00 −7.02 5.83 0.98
Finland 388 0.34 0.32 2.16 −7.16 8.59 0.38 0.36 1.96 −7.55 8.01 0.97
France 420 0.31 0.29 1.92 −7.15 5.86 0.35 0.34 1.81 −5.85 5.19 0.97
Germany 420 0.23 0.21 1.86 −6.84 5.31 0.26 0.24 1.78 −6.93 5.08 0.97
Greece 297 0.33 0.14 5.95 −30.84 26.45 0.54 0.28 7.08 −41.35 41.84 0.93
Hungary 299 0.23 0.17 3.49 −9.83 12.42 0.24 0.18 3.41 −16.31 15.34 0.86
Ireland 420 0.34 0.30 2.62 −14.79 15.45 0.35 0.32 2.42 −14.16 14.54 0.97
Italy 393 0.42 0.38 2.51 −8.03 10.26 0.44 0.41 2.38 −11.27 8.62 0.94
Japan 420 0.19 0.18 1.45 −7.76 5.30 0.24 0.23 1.33 −6.15 5.19 0.95
Mexico 162 0.13 0.09 2.60 −7.25 5.76 0.12 0.09 2.38 −7.18 7.95 0.87
Netherlands 420 0.22 0.20 1.93 −8.54 6.71 0.27 0.25 1.83 −8.22 5.21 0.97
New Zealand 393 0.38 0.36 2.10 −8.40 7.28 0.40 0.38 2.04 −7.11 6.93 0.95
Norway 373 0.29 0.27 1.96 −6.24 6.01 0.28 0.27 1.85 −6.48 5.50 0.97
Poland 276 0.32 0.28 2.85 −11.06 12.51 0.31 0.27 2.92 −11.71 13.92 0.94
Portugal 365 0.40 0.35 3.18 −13.23 14.98 0.45 0.40 3.16 −14.84 20.14 0.95
Singapore 180 −0.01 −0.03 1.89 −6.13 4.94 0.15 0.13 1.90 −4.66 11.07 0.88
South Korea 141 0.12 0.10 1.84 −4.75 6.05 0.14 0.12 1.72 −3.90 5.88 0.98
Spain 397 0.37 0.34 2.48 −9.92 9.47 0.42 0.40 2.38 −9.76 9.65 0.96
Sweden 420 0.35 0.32 2.30 −7.82 6.77 0.38 0.36 2.12 −8.48 5.62 0.98
Switzerland 420 0.19 0.18 1.65 −4.86 5.88 0.23 0.21 1.53 −4.43 5.06 0.94
United Kingdom 420 0.23 0.20 2.27 −10.62 8.23 0.24 0.22 2.16 −10.79 7.03 0.98
United States 420 0.24 0.22 2.23 −7.34 11.71 0.23 0.20 2.20 −6.24 11.69 0.98
21

--- PDF PAGE 76 ---
B Social Security benefits calculations
We compute Social Security benefit payments using the formulas effective in 2022. Given that Social
Security formulas are inflation-indexed, our calculations use real 2022 USD. As such, the amount subject
to Social Security taxes for each year in the investor’s working life is the minimum of annual income
and $147,000, which is the maximum taxable earnings. The average indexed monthly earnings (AIME)
for each investor is the average of their highest 35 years of taxed earnings divided by 12. An investor
who retires at the normal retirement age of 67 has a personal Social Security benefit according to a
formula that sums 90% of AIME up to $1,024, 32% of AIME between $1,024 and $6,172, and 15%
of AIME in excess of $6,172. The retirement benefit reduces by (5 /9)% per month of early retirement
up to 36 months and further reduces by (5 /12)% per month of early retirement between ages 62 (the
earliest allowed retirement age) and 64 (normal retirement age minus 36 months). The retirement
benefit increases by (2/3)% per month of late retirement between ages 67 and 70 (the latest allowed
retirement age).
Spouses may be eligible for additional benefits under the Social Security system. Some investors
may optimally choose to take spousal and/or survivor benefits. When both members of the couple are
living, each spouse has the option to take half of their spouse’s personal retirement benefit as a spousal
benefit in lieu of taking their own retirement benefit. This option becomes useful if one of the two
household members earns substantially more than the other during their working years. The spousal
benefit is reduced by (25 /36)% per month of early retirement up to 36 months and further reduced
by (5/12)% per month between ages 62 and 64. Upon the death of one spouse, the surviving spouse
qualifies for a survivor benefit. The potential survivor benefit is the personal benefit of the deceased
spouse if the surviving spouse is full retirement age. If not, the survivor benefit is reduced by up to
28.5% (if taken before age 60). The surviving spouse may take the larger of their personal retirement
benefit and their survivor benefit.
Finally , the SSA administers the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, which provides pay-
ments to retirees (and certain other individuals) who have little income from other sources. SSI pay-
ments are reduced by earnings, and the maximum monthly benefit amounts in 2022 are $1,261 for
couples and $841 for singles. We impose minimum monthly consumption levels of $1,261 for couples
and $841 for singles to reflect SSI payments for investors who earn little enough during their working
years that their retirement income from Social Security and savings falls below these levels. This mod-
eling choice reflects the social safety net and avoids issues with computing utility when consumption
levels are zero or low.
22

--- PDF PAGE 77 ---
C Supplemental results
This appendix contains supplemental empirical results.
C.1 Household longevity
Table C.I summarizes the distribution of age at death in years conditional on survival to age 25
based on the SSA data and our simulation procedure described in Section 4. The table reports the
mean, standard deviation, and distributional percentiles for age at death for the heterosexual couple,
the female, the male, the female couple, and the male couple. The statistics for the couples correspond
to the age of the last survivor from the couple at death. In the base case of a heterosexual couple,
the mean age of the last survivor at death is 87.6 years, and the median age is 88.9 years. There is
considerable uncertainty over longevity outcomes. The 5th percentile of age at death for the couple is
70.8 years, and the 95th percentile is 100.0 years. This uncertainty is an important feature to consider in
assessing the ability of investment strategies to fund consumption through retirement. The last column
of Table C.I reports the likelihood that a given investor type dies before reaching retirement age. There
is a 19.5% (11.9%) chance that the male (female) dies before age 65, and there is a 2.3% chance that
neither member of the heterosexual couple survives into the retirement period.
C.2 Conditional strategy performance
In Section 5.2.2, we show that the optimal fixed-weight strategy outperforms the four benchmark
strategies in preserving capital during the retirement period (i.e., the optimal strategy leads to the low-
est probability of financial ruin under the 4% withdrawal rule). The outperformance of the all-equity
strategy in capital preservation during retirement challenges the traditional view that investors should
diversify into bonds as they age. In this section, we further characterize this result by examining ruin
probabilities conditional on couple and market outcomes. Figure C.1 plots conditional ruin probabilities
for three benchmark strategies and the optimal strategy (bills, with their exceedingly high ruin proba-
bilities, are omitted to enhance the readability of the figure). In each panel, we divide the 1,000,000
simulation draws into quintiles based on an outcome and plot the ruin probability within each quintile.
Panel A of Figure C.1 examines ruin probabilities in relation to couple longevity . Short-lived couples
are unlikely to exhaust their savings, and the ruin probabilities range from 0.3% (optimal strategy) to
3.3% (domestic stocks). Differences across strategies are the most stark for long-lived couples. The
optimal strategy produces a 14.9% probability of ruin, which is more than twice as high as the uncondi-
tional 7.0% probability . The other strategies fare much worse with high longevity , with ruin probabilities
of 29.4% for domestic stocks, 32.2% for the balanced portfolio, and 41.2% for the TDF . These results
emphasize that continuing to generate wealth throughout retirement is crucial when investors may have
a relatively long retirement period. The poor unconditional performance of the TDF , which invests little
in stocks during retirement, is partially attributable to its struggle to preserve capital for couples who
live long lives.
Panel B conditions on the cumulative real domestic stock return in retirement. In the worst quintile
of realized returns, the optimal strategy has a ruin probability of 18.9%, which far exceeds the uncon-
ditional probability . But the all-equity strategy is still the safest when domestic stocks do poorly . The
domestic stock strategy is hardest hit, naturally , with a 52.4% probability of ruin. The balanced portfolio
and TDF also have high ruin probabilities of 45.9% and 39.6%. When real returns on domestic stocks
are poor over long investment periods, bonds and bills also tend to have poor real returns. Thus, the
QDIAs provide little shelter during the storm.
23

--- PDF PAGE 78 ---
Panel C of Figure C.1 examines the role of inflation. If realized inflation during retirement is low, the
strategies perform relatively well with ruin probabilities ranging from 1.1% (optimal) to 6.0% (domestic
stocks). If high inflation hits, the optimal strategy has a ruin probability of 15.3% versus 38.9% for
domestic stocks, 51.1% for the balanced strategy , and 62.8% for the TDF . The low absolute correlation
between inflation and international stock returns over long horizons (as shown in Table I) implies that
international stocks provide crucial diversification benefits in inflationary periods.
The benefits of international diversification depend on the correlation between returns on domestic
stocks and international stocks. This correlation varies over time[e.g., Longin and Solnik (2001)], so the
value of international diversification could also vary . Panel D studies strategy performance conditional
on the realized correlation between domestic and international stocks during the couple’s retirement
period. The ruin probability of the optimal strategy is stable across the quintiles, ranging from 5.3%
to 7.9%. Other strategies actually have more dependence, with higher ruin probabilities when the
realized domestic-international correlation is low. The low correlations seem to be proxying for worse
economic times and wars when domestic markets do relatively poorly , and high correlations tend to
line up with better asset class returns. Whatever the underlying causes may be, the results in Panel D
assuage concerns that a high correlation between domestic and international stocks will invalidate the
optimal, all-equity strategy .
C.3 Time-varying investment allocations conditional on household age under alterna-
tive retirement spending rules
In Section 5.3.1, we present the optimal asset allocation policy for a household conditional on age.
The results correspond to our base case simulation design, in which the household follows Bengen’s
(1994) 4% rule for retirement account withdrawals. Figure C.2 shows the optimal asset allocation
policy under the alternative assumption that the household withdraws an annualized 4% of wealth at
the beginning of each month.
C.4 Endogenous retirement timing
In Section 5.3.3, we consider the optimal fixed-weight asset allocation policy for households under
endogenous retirement timing. Table C.II reports the estimated optimal retirement ages as a function
of the household’s current earnings, current retirement wealth, and expected Social Security benefit.
C.5 Alternative samples
In Section 5.4.1, we consider the optimal static asset allocation policy estimated from samples
restricted to countries with relatively large populations or large market capitalization-to-GDP ratios.
Table C.III reports the sample start dates for developed countries in each of these alternative samples.
C.6 Leverage
In Section 5.4.4, we estimate the optimal fixed asset class weights and leverage levels for households
who are allowed to borrow at a low (0.37% per year), medium (1.40%), or high (6.50%) spread above
the local yield on short-term government bills. The results correspond to the base case household risk
aversion parameter of γ = 3.84. Table C.IV reports the optimal asset allocation and leverage policies
for alternative risk aversion parameters between 0.5 and 10.0.
24

--- PDF PAGE 79 ---
C.7 American exceptionalism
In Section 5.5, we examine the role of American exceptionalism beliefs on optimal portfolio choice.
Table C.V reports the optimal allocation policy for investors under alternative subjective beliefs that
forward-looking returns should be drawn from a distribution estimated from historical US returns rather
than historical developed country returns.
25

--- PDF PAGE 80 ---
Table C.I: Distribution of age at death
The table summarizes the distribution of age at death in years conditional on survival to age 25 based on the actuarial life tables from the SSA. For each
investor type (i.e., heterosexual couple, single female, single male, female couple, or male couple), the table reports the mean, standard deviation, and
distribution percentiles of the age at death. The statistics for the couples correspond to the age of the last survivor at death. The last column in the table
shows the likelihood of death prior to reaching retirement age at 65.
Moments Percentiles
Investor Mean StDev 1% 5% 10% 25% 50% 75% 90% 95% 99% E[1 {Tmax≤480}]
Female and male 87.6 9.1 59.4 70.8 76.1 83.0 88.9 93.8 97.7 100.0 104.5 0.023
Single female 81.9 13.9 36.0 54.2 62.7 75.5 84.9 91.5 96.3 98.9 103.8 0.119
Single male 77.2 15.3 30.6 46.1 55.9 68.9 80.6 88.3 93.5 96.2 101.1 0.195
Both female 89.3 8.5 62.7 74.0 78.7 84.9 90.3 94.9 98.8 101.1 105.5 0.014
Both male 85.5 9.7 55.9 67.2 72.8 80.6 87.0 92.1 96.1 98.4 102.8 0.038
26

--- PDF PAGE 81 ---
Table C.II: Optimal retirement ages
The table reports optimal retirement ages conditional on retirement balance level, income level, and Social Secu-
rity level. At age 62, couples are divided into terciles in each of the three dimensions with independent sorts. The
table shows the optimal retirement age for each of the 27 resulting couple types.
Social Security level
Income level Low Social Security Mid Social Security High Social Security
Panel A: Low retirement account balance
Low income 70 69 67
Mid income 70 69 67
High income 70 70 68
Panel B: Mid retirement account balance
Low income 69 66 63
Mid income 69 67 65
High income 69 68 67
Panel C: High retirement account balance
Low income 63 62 62
Mid income 65 64 62
High income 67 66 65
27

--- PDF PAGE 82 ---
Table C.III: Country-level start dates for alternative samples.
The table shows the sample start dates for developed countries in the alternative samples with screens based on
population or equity market size.
Country population ≥ Market-cap/GDP
Country Base sample 0.5% × world population ratio ≥ 0.5
United Kingdom 1890:01 1890:01 1890:01
Netherlands 1914:01 — 1919:01
Belgium 1897:01 — 1897:01
France 1890:01 1890:01 1890:01
Norway 1914:01 — 2006:01
Germany 1890:01 1890:01 1912:01
Denmark 1890:01 — 1890:01
Switzerland 1914:01 — 1928:01
United States 1890:01 1890:01 1928:01
Canada 1891:01 1933:01 1902:01
Argentina 1947:02 1947:02 —
New Zealand 1896:01 — 1900:01
Australia 1901:01 — 1932:01
Sweden 1910:01 — 1911:01
Austria 1920:01 — 1923:01
Chile period I 1927:01 — 1927:01
Greece 1981:02 — 1999:01
Czechoslovakia 1922:05 1922:05 —
Japan 1930:01 1930:01 1938:01
Portugal 1934:01 — 1999:01
Italy 1931:01 1931:01 2000:01
Ireland 1936:01 — 1945:01
Singapore 1998:07 — 1998:07
Iceland 2002:01 — 2002:01
Luxembourg 1982:01 — 1985:01
Türkiye 2010:02 2010:02 —
Spain 1959:01 1959:01 1998:01
Finland 1969:01 — 1998:01
Mexico 2001:08 2001:08 —
Czech Republic 2000:05 — —
Hungary 1999:02 — —
Poland 1999:06 1999:06 —
South Korea 2000:11 2000:11 2000:11
Slovakia 2000:01 — —
Chile period II 2010:01 — 2010:01
Estonia — — —
Israel 2010:01 — 2010:01
Slovenia 2010:01 — —
Latvia 2016:01 — —
Lithuania 2018:01 — —
Colombia 2020:01 2020:01 2020:01
28

--- PDF PAGE 83 ---
Table C.IV: Optimal static asset allocation policies with leverage
The table reports the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills and the level
of borrowing as a percentage of wealth for the optimal static asset allocation policy under alternative risk aversion
parameters and costs of leverage. The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Section 4.
Optimal asset class weights
Domestic International Borrowing
Risk aversion stocks stocks Bonds Bills (% of wealth)
Panel A: Borrowing spread of 6.50% (high)
γ = 0.5 32% 68% 0% 0% 0%
γ = 1.0 35% 65% 0% 0% 0%
γ = 2.0 35% 65% 0% 0% 0%
γ = 5.0 33% 67% 0% 0% 0%
γ = 7.5 33% 67% 0% 0% 0%
γ = 10.0 33% 67% 0% 0% 0%
Panel B: Borrowing spread of 1.40% (medium)
γ = 0.5 30% 70% 0% 0% 100%
γ = 1.0 35% 65% 0% 0% 100%
γ = 2.0 36% 64% 0% 0% 70%
γ = 5.0 34% 66% 0% 0% 50%
γ = 7.5 34% 66% 0% 0% 50%
γ = 10.0 34% 66% 0% 0% 55%
Panel C: Borrowing spread of 0.37% (low)
γ = 0.5 30% 70% 0% 0% 100%
γ = 1.0 34% 66% 0% 0% 100%
γ = 2.0 31% 58% 11% 0% 100%
γ = 5.0 28% 56% 16% 0% 100%
γ = 7.5 28% 56% 16% 0% 100%
γ = 10.0 28% 57% 15% 0% 100%
29

--- PDF PAGE 84 ---
Table C.V: Optimal static asset allocation policies under alternative subjective beliefs
The table reports the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks, bonds, and bills for the optimal
static asset allocation policy under alternative subjective beliefs regarding the extent to which historical US returns
and historical developed country returns reflect the forward-looking return distribution. The lifecycle design and
bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Sections 4 and 5.5.
Optimal asset class weights
Domestic International
Probability US is “special” (x%) stocks stocks Bonds Bills
0% (Developed sample only) 33% 67% 0% 0%
10% 38% 62% 0% 0%
20% 43% 57% 0% 0%
30% 48% 52% 0% 0%
40% 54% 46% 0% 0%
50% 60% 40% 0% 0%
60% 68% 32% 0% 0%
70% 76% 24% 0% 0%
80% 85% 15% 0% 0%
90% 96% 4% 0% 0%
100% (US sample only) 100% 0% 0% 0%
30

--- PDF PAGE 85 ---
Low 2 3 4 High
0%
20%
40%
60%Probability of financial ruin
(A) Longevity
Domestic Stocks
Balanced
TDF
Optimal
Low 2 3 4 High
0%
20%
40%
60%Probability of financial ruin
(B) Domestic stock return
Low 2 3 4 High
0%
20%
40%
60%Probability of financial ruin
(C) Inflation
Low 2 3 4 High
0%
20%
40%
60%Probability of financial ruin
(D) Domestic-international stock correlation
Figure C.1. Conditional ruin probabilities. The figure shows the probability of financial ruin conditional on
quintile outcomes of household longevity (Panel A), realized returns for domestic stocks (Panel B), realized
inflation (Panel C), and realized correlation between real returns for domestic stocks and international stocks
(Panel D) across 1,000,000 bootstrap simulations for households adopting various asset allocation strategies.
The lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Section 4. The ruin probabilities in Panels B,
C, and D condition on realizations during the retirement period.
31

--- PDF PAGE 86 ---
25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95
Age
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%Asset allocation
Domestic stocks
International stocks
Bonds
Bills
Figure C.2. Optimal dynamic asset allocation policy conditional on household age with a 4% of current
wealth withdrawal rule. The figure shows the investment positions in domestic stocks, international stocks,
bonds, and bills for the optimal dynamic asset allocation policy that conditions on household age. The house-
hold’s monthly withdrawal strategy in retirement is equal to 4% (annualized) of current wealth. The other
lifecycle design and bootstrap assumptions are detailed in Sections 4 and 5.3.1. The vertical dashed line
indicates the household’s exogenous retirement age.
32